 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 73 

### An Overview of Pathophysiology and Management of Cervical Cancer 

 Mathur Aditya1*, Thakur Simran^2 , Dr. Singh Pal Ajay^3 

(^1) Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical chemistry, Lingayas Vidyapeeth, Faridabad-121002, India. (^2) Department of Pharmacy, B.Pharmacy final year, Lingayas Vidyapeeth, Faridabad, India. (^3) Department of Pharmacy, Professor of Pharmacognosy, Lingayas Vidyapeeth, Faridabad, India. ***Corresponding author’s E-mail:** mathuradity@gmail.com **Received:** 05-04-2024; **Revised:** 22-06-2024; **Accepted:** 01-07-2024; **Published on:** 15-07-2024. **ABSTRACT** Cervical cancer is a persistent health problem worldwide, especially in developing countries where getting good health care facilities, treatment and screening is a dream. This review paper gives an inclusive overview of pathophysiology and management strategies for cervical cancer. Beginning with the discussing normal physiology of those parts which are involved in cervical cancer such as vagina, cervix, and the pathophysiology of cervical cancer which include HPV infection. The paper explores the stepwise progression from normal cervical tissue to invasive carcinoma and shedding light on the complication occur in the cervical cancer. This article gives proper information about the clinical feature or symptom which helps to identifies the Undiagnosed cervical dysplasia, then can be treated in more efficient way and also provide info about the FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) staging approach in cervical cancer for the clinical evaluation. Furthermore, the review highlights ongoing research efforts to improve screening facilities, prevention programs, treatment tactics and supportive care for cervical cancer patients. Emerging technologies like nano technology and advancements in chemotherapy. Overall, this review Can be a great asset for healthcare professionals, Scholars & policymakers working at avoiding, screening & Approaches to treating cervical cancer. By elucidating the complex pathophysiology and outlining current management approaches, it aims to contribute to the global efforts towards reducing the burden of this devastating disease. **Keywords:** Cervical cancer-1, mortality-2, worldwide-3, pathophysiology-4, HPV-5, Cervix-6. 

##### INTRODUCTION 

ne of the top four cancers diagnosed in women worldwide is Cancer of the cervix. A certain form of Neoplasm that starts in the cervix, or lower Portion of the uterus, and travels to the vaginal opening is called cervical cancer.^1 This human virus is the main reason of this type of disease which is intimately transmit and approx. 80% of women infected by the HPV infection^2 .This type of infection are very often in the time of adolescence and early adulthood^3 but Women of all ages are affected by cervical cancer because it may take 10 to 15 years to exhibit any changes in cervix, which is why it's a very serious global health issue because access to adequate screening and healthcare resources is restricted in middle and lower wages brackets nations **expected** Shortage in facilities, technology, & awareness^4. 

The two most common histological types of cervical cancer are adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma accounts for approximately 70% of cases, while squamous cell carcinoma makes up around 25% of cervical cancer diagnoses. Respectively, the Precancerous abnormalities usually mark the beginning of the progression of cervical cancer in the cervical cell and there are exceeding 200 forms of HPV point out found on DNA series and if treatment is not received at the right time, then these changes will eventually grow into an invasive malignancy. It is possible to discover it early and take action with routine screening techniques like HPV tests and Pap smears because cervical cancer develops slowly.^5 

 While Cancer of the cervix rates have fallen in wealthy countries, it remains a major health problem in underdeveloped and poor nations. despite improvements in preventive methods like HPV immunization and surgical treatment. Over Seventeen out of twenty mortality rate came from cervical cancer occur in nations with middle & low incomes.^6 Global takes action to prevent and control the risk factor of cervical cancer. It must cover advanced infrastructure, drilling on risk factors, strengthen the healthcare facilities and awareness campaigns. This introduction set the foundation for the more thorough examination of cervical cancer's causes, risk factors, symptoms, diagnosis, available treatments, and preventative measures.^7 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Normal Physiology Vagina In female reproductive system vagina perform a significant part in several important functions like menstruation, child birth or in pregnancy and in sexual intercourse. The human vagina is generally referred to as a slightly thick-walled Sshaped fibromuscular collapsible tube. Vagina connects or joins the vulva which is external genitals with the cervix (lower part of uterus). The vagina is 6 to 10 cm (about 3.94 in) in length extending from cervix to uterus. It contains a unique microbiome, mostly composed of Lactobacillus bacteria (shaped like rods, non-spore-forming, gram-positive microbes). This 

# O 

#### Review Article 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 74 

microbiome helps to keep the vagina atmosphere slightly acidic, thus it protects from pathogens. Despite not having a gland, the vagina secretes a large amount of fluid.^8 When compared to the other part of female reproductive system, vagina is relatively thin and only consists of only three tunics: Mucosa is the deepest layer, muscularis is the intermediate layer, and adventitia is the uppermost layer. The lamina propria and a non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium make up the mucosa, sometimes referred to as the mucous membrane or epithelium, this stratified squamous epithelium is similar to the lining of human mouth and this layer helps to protects the deeper tissues from friction, infection and irritation. Lamina propria is highly vascularized which means it contains blood vessels, lymphatic vessels and nerves. Two layers of smooth muscle comprise the muscularis, or middle layer, of the vagina, the inner circular muscle layer surrounds & helps to constrict or restrict the vaginal opening. The outer longitudinal muscle layer helps during childbirth or intercourse by stretching and expanding the vagina. The adventitia consists of areolar connective tissue on the outside and interior fibers that are elastic.^9 

**_Cervix_** 

The uterus's bottom region contains the cervix, which has a muscular canal. Cervical canal which is 2 to 3 long and approximately 3mm (about 0.12 in) in diameter it forms a link between the vagina and the uterine lumen cervix have many roles, but the major function is to provide passage for the fluids to pass between the uterus and vagina and cervix cell shows the cell changes that can indicate the malignancy.^10 The superior orifice (the opening) is commonly referred as internal os , inferior opening of cervix into the lumen commonly referred as external os.^11 

There are several structures that support the cervix. First _Pubocervical fasiais_ a dense connective tissue that surrounds the lower part of the cervix and uterus. 

second cardinal ligaments: These are two broad ligaments which extend from a cervix attaches to the pelvis structure and provides support for its cervix and uterus. 

third Uterosacral ligaments: the back of cervix and the sacrum, the triangular bone at the base of the spine is joined together by two strong bands of tissue known as Uterosacral ligaments.^12 

The pathway between the internal and external ostia is referred as cervical canal. The portion of uterine cervix extending the ectocervix is the part that enters female reproductive tract. The ectocervix is lined by stratified squamous epithelia cells form the lining of outer surface of the cervix, the major function of these types of cells is to provide protection and support. The cervical canal is lined by columnar epithelial mucosal glands that secrete thick, mucous, acidic secretions. These secretions fill and seal the cervical canal and form a mucous plug, which prevents the penetration of pathogens to the uterus and the last type of cell is goblet cells which produces mucus in cervical canal and helps to protect the cervix from infection. 13 

 Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) It has been known since the 1970s that we came to know about the HPV (humanpapilloma virus) infection, which is one is among the primary reasons for cervical carcinoma. And there are varieties of Papillomavirus that can induce the malignancy of the cervix epithelium.^14 Human papilloma virus is rapidly evolving into a global issue, mainly to developing countries, HPV triggering malignancy and the most significant and common of which is cervical cancer.^15 Most people consider HPV infection can only spread through sexual activity, still, HPV can also spread by non-sexual routes such as vertical transmission during pregnancy and casual physical contact.^16 Human papillomavirus (HPV) has double stranded DNA viruses, they belong to the papova virus family, comparing to the other virus HPV does not have any envelope to surround its capsid, the diameter of the PV virion is 55 nm, its DNA can replicate within the nucleus and has more than 7900 base pair genome and they are further divided into three groups 1. Early (E1, E2, E3, E4, E5, E6, E7), 2. Late (L1, L2), and 3. Control. These genomes' main functions are to encode viral proteins which are crucial for capsid formation. The outer shell of PVs is called capsid. This capsid possesses different types of symmetry called as icosahedral means it 'shave 20 equilateral triangular faces with roughly spherical shape, they also have subunits called as capsomers approximately 72 capsomers join themselves to create a capsid structure and capsid main function is to provide protection to genetic material.^17 

 Over 200 kinds of HPV virus are recognized for mankind but not all of them cause any serious health issue or development of any kind cancerous cell, however HPV virus divided into five genera: nu (v), mu (μ), alpha (α), beta (β) and gamma (γ), additionally alpha and beta are thoroughly researched. The alpha papilloma virus group members cause infection in mucosal epithelia, furthermore according to the tendency to induce cancer the alpha papilloma virus separated into kinds that are high-risk (HR) and low-risk (LR). The low hazard virus causes viral infection such as benign tumors, and commonly caused by Ninety percent of genital warts are caused by HPV 6 and HPV 11. means they generally does not cause cancer but on the other hand HPV 16 & HPV 18 are the major reason of the 80% cervix cancer.^18 

 Recent studies show that Cervical cancer is primarily dependent on the E6 and E7 oncoproteins. The E6 disrupt the p53 enzyme activity, E6 binds with P53 cause the interferences with the cell cycle, E6 bind with AP(accessory protein) which has ubiquitin ligase activity, E6+E6+AP combined with the p53 degradation region, which inhibit all the function of p53, which increases the uncontrolled replication of cells with HPV 16 or HPV 18 infection, when E7 oncoproteins form complex with pRb releases free E2F and inhibit pRb function, this ultimately causes the cell loss its control over the cell cycle.^19 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 75 

 Clinical feature Another health threat is cervical cancer. care problem, as the time passes it becomes worsened, so the clinical features of Cancer of the cervix can vary Based on the progression of cervix carcinoma. The main desire of identifying clinical features is to spot the pre-malignancy changes so they can be treated before they become severe form of cancer.^20 The most typical signs of cervical cancer include Abdominal and pelvic pain as malignancy spreads, ongoing pelvic pain or discomfort could develop. Lower back or pelvic discomfort may feel vague or acute, pain or discomfort during sexual intercourse (dyspareunia) can be a symptom of advanced cervical cancer.^21 Foul-smelling vaginal discharge, particularly it happens in between menstrual cycles or after menopause, may indicate cervical cancer. The discharge may be watery which might be red in colour with foul smell. Changes in menstrual patterns, such as heavier or longer periods than usual, can be an indication of cervical cancer.^22 Some other clinical features are painful intercourse, Vagina appears tight or narrow, Dryness and discomfort in the vagina and smell coming from the genitals.^23 Complication in cervical cancer Many difficulties may arise from cervical cancer, especially if the disease is not identified and not treated in its early stages. Some common complications associated with cervical cancer include; 1st is metastasis in which cervical cancer can spread to nearby tissues and organs, including the bladder, uterus, pelvic wall and rectum. Pelvic pain can be caused by the tumor or by the cancer spreading to other tissues in the pelvis. Pregnancy with late cervical cancer typically shows pain due to tumor.^24 Those patients who are suffering from cervical cancer for longer period may experience lower back pain or pelvic pain that can radiate to the lower extremities in the posterior side, swelling in the legs or leg edema, is not a direct sign of cervical cancer. However, several issues associated with cervical cancer, or its treatment can cause edema. Changes in the bowel or bladder, including Feeling pressure in the pelvis, along with blood in urine or stool, or unusual passage of these fluids, may indicate the advancement of disease.^25 ETIOLOGY 

**_smoking_** 

 Smoking is a well-established hazard factor for Cancer of the cervix. Smoking tobacco heightens the likelihood of cervical cancer. They can ease the defense mechanism because it is making harder for the body to fight the HPV infection.^26 Smoking also directly harms the cervical cells, the risk for the current various investigations, a higher dose of ingested tobacco corresponded to a greater response (negative outcome). The ORS was higher in more advanced pre-invasive neoplasms (order 1-3).^27 There are several mechanisms which Might raise the danger factor of cervix cancer. There is a Tobacoo derivatives cause immunized deficiency Cigarettes include compounds, particularly nicotine and its catabolite, which can induce 

 harm the DNA in cells called squamous cells.^28 They may produce epigenomic alterations in the mucosa of the cervix, resulting to the pathogenesis of cancer in the cervix and in numerous areas of the body. The link between smoking and cancer of cervix has been recognized since the 1970s. This connection was observed through the correlation between the rates of cervical cancer and other cancers associated with tobacco use. The potential causal relationship between cigarette smoking and the development of cervical cancer deserves further independent investigation and analysis, separate from its interaction with HPV infection.^30 HPV Cervical cancer is primarily caused by a persistent infection with high-risk strains of HPV, which are transmitted through sexual contact that are restricted by the barrier contraceptives and metaplastic of cervical squamous epithelium of transformation zone. HPV (human papillomavirus) is identified as the predominant causative agent in the steps involved in cervical cancer development. It is a type of virus which is transmitted through sexual contact. 31 HPV is the most prevalent cause of precancerous and malignant genital infections. In cervical cancer, there are most cases that occur due to the infection of HPV, with the type 16 and type 18. HPV, particularly HPV 16, has been discovered to be relatively frequent in the world.^32 99.7% of all cervical carcinomas bear high-risk HPV when the correction is made for the non-reproductive tissues and inadequate DNA. 75% HPV strains, specifically types 16 and 18, are recognized as the primary etiological agents responsible for the development of cervical cancer. 33 The C. trachomatis C. trachomatis contributes to the higher incidence of cervix squamous cell carcinoma, they enhance the probabilities of tumours of squamous cells by raising the sensitivity to HPV or enhancing HPV effects.^34 It is common sexually transmitted infection that can increased the hazard of cervical cancer, particularly when they combined by means of the HPV infection, women with chlamydia may have debilitate ability to clear the HPV infection. Chlamydia infection can cause the inflammation in the cervix then they develop the cervical cancer.^35 HIV 

 They weaken the immune system. HPV is transmitted by sexual copulation and the primary cause of cervical cancer, The immune system of an HIV-positive person is less able to combat HPV infection, and there may be a higher incidence of persistent HPV infection among those with HIV who also have cervical cancer.^36 HIV and cervical cancer are linked that indicates women having with HIV have a higher chance of having high-risk HPV infections and persistent HPV infections.^37 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 76 

**_Sexual partner_** 

 Multiple sexual partners may increase the danger of cervical malignancy. That’s because the exposure towards different sexual partner increases the likelihood of on countering and enhances the strains risk of HPV, the threat aspect for cancer related to cervical is the early age of copulation.^38 It has been proposed that having sex when older is linked to a lower diagnostic age.^39 

**_PATHOGENESIS_** 

 The FIGO staging approach is commonly involved for the female reproductive organ's tumor, specifically cancer related to cervical. FIGO staging relied on clinical evaluation, taking into account the high prevalence of cervical cancer in low-income areas with limited access to modern technologies, so that all the procedure or test related to the cancer is done in low cost, Staging is clinically assessed by tumor size and the degree of pelvic extension. The current FIGO staging system for cervical cancer relies on clinical examinations such as colposcopy, barium enema or lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, Physical examination intravenous pyelography, cervical or cone biopsy, and chest radiography are all acceptable for staging, as are a few other tests performed in select situations, like proctoscopy and cystoscopy. It is not predicated on findings made during surgery.^40 Surgical vs clinical staging which is most effective treatment approaches for different stages of cervical cancer? This has been a significant issue for several decades. Clinical staging is not as accurate as surgical staging, despite advancements in imaging modalities and tumor size measurement. The FIGO staging classifies cervical cancer as a local illness which affecting the pelvis so, Surgical staging cannot be used globally, particularly in countries with inadequate resources or less advancement in technology where late stages is widespread because of less awareness and surgical facilities are limited. 41 One the basis of FIGO staging, the cervical cancer is mainly divided into 4 stages, and then treatment plan is based on these stages: Stage I: In this stage cancer is still so small that it can only be visible with a microscope, and it has not spread deeply into the cervical tissues. Stage I carcinoma should be ignored if it is only present in the cervix and has not spread to the uterine corpus. Stage 1: subdivided into stage IA and stage IB. stage IA: This invasive cancer can only be diagnosed through microscopic examination. During this stage, all visible lesions, regardless of size, are identified. According to FIGO staging criteria the stage IA tumor have maximum stromal invasion of 5 mm and lateral spread of 7 mm, the depth of invasion should not exceed 5mm and the measurement is from the epithelium's base to the original tissue, surface, or glandular. 

 IA1: These tumors exhibit stromal penetration not deeper than 3mm (≤ 3 mm), and horizontal spread not more than 7mm (≤ 7 mm) and they are associated with having very 

 low incidence of lymph node involvement. The fact that the presence of LVSI (lymphovascular space invasion) in stage IA1 cervical carcinoma raises the probability of lymph node metastases and cancer recurrence by about 5%. IA2: Cervical cancer is detected only through microscopic examination, with a Strome's depth of invasion greater than 3 mm (> 3 mm) or less than 5 mm (≤ 5 mm), and a horizontal spread of less than 7 mm (≤ 7 mm). IB: In this stage clinically specific lesion which are clinically noticeable or a microscopic lesion larger than A2. IB Also have 2 subpart which are IB1 and IB2 IB1: Invasive cancer stromal invasive depth of ≥5 mm and maximum size of <2 cm IB2: Clinical evident lesion with a maximum diameter of more than 4 cm 42 

 Stage II: Tumors spread beyond cervix but not through the wall of the pelvis. The cancer extends to the vagina but does not reach the bottom third. Stage IIA1: Clinically noticeable or visible lesion 4cm or less (~4 cm), , involving less than the vagina's top two thirds stage IIA2: Noticeable lesion in a clinical setting 4 cm with involvement in less than the vaginal upper two thirds Stage IIB: Not into the pelvic side wall, but clearly involved in the parametrial involvement 43 

 Stage III: Cancer impacts the pelvic barrier, the lower component of the genitals hydronephrosis or a nonfunctioning kidney, and/or the pelvic and/or para-aortic lymph nodes. stage IIIA The cancer only affects the vagina's bottom part; it does not extend to the pelvic wall. stage IIIB: Extension to the pelvic wall and hydronephrosis or renal failure (unless an underlying cause is identified) stage IIIC: Tumor involvement, regardless of size and extent, involving pelvic and/or para-aortic lymph nodes (with r and p notations) c stage IIIC1: Only metastases from pelvic lymph nodes. stage IIIC2: Metastasis of para-aortic lymph nodes. 44 Stage IV: Carcinoma has spread beyond the pelvis and impacted the bladder or rectum mucosa, as shown by a biopsy. Bullous edoema is not considered Stage IV. In Stage IVA: Rectal, bladder, or upper urethral mucosa can be infiltrated by tumors. In stage IVB: Spread to the remote body parts including pelvic nodes.^45 

 Risk factors Parity The rising number of full-term gestations holds significance concerning HPV and cancer of cervix. Females who have experienced multiple pregnancies face an elevated hazard 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 77 

of contracting HPV or developing cervical cancer. The most plausible explanation for this phenomenon is the local tissue trauma during vaginal delivery or the cellular oxidative stress, which can lead to enhanced DNA damage and facilitation of HPV integration. 46 Women with the more pregnancy have greater susceptibility to cervical cancer as compared to do they have fewer pregnancy. The possible mechanism for this proposed the increase the hormone level and the impaired the immune system of the pregnancy, Due to the hormonal change during the pregnancy they affect the growth of cervical cells and the increase the susceptibility to the HPV. In the multipurpose Female transition zones extends longer on the ectocervix, facilitating direct contact to the virus. 47 

**_Geographical region changes_** 

Cervical cancer one of the most persistent malignity influencing the women in the world after the breast cancer and lung cancer. In the geographical changes the migration pattern and the urbanization can influence the cervical cancer incident and mortality rates. According to the Global cancer statics (GCST), they are more than half million new cases are diagnosed every year and then the claim the lives more than a quarter million women. 48 Social economic factor and the environmental exposure difference between the regions and the affecting the cervical cancer while the cervical screening and the HPV vaccination are helping to reduce the invasion developed country, but the burden of cervical cancer disproportionately affects developing nations. countries where they lack the basic healthcare 49 

**Oral contraceptives** 

Oral contraceptive the use of oral contraceptive or other hormonal contraceptive are increase the Peril of the cervix cancer. Oral contraceptives including oestrogen and progesterone may affect the prevalence of cervical cancer through raising HPV infection & raising the advancement of pre-cancerous lesions. 50 Synergistic effect and interaction in between HPV & Oral contraceptive Augmentation the peril for cervical cancer, conducted a meta-analysis by JARC.^51 Overall increase in the with the old contraceptive is small especially when we compared to the other risk factor like HPV infection as the risk decreases after the discontinuation of the oral contraceptive administration^52 

**_Nutrition and Dietary_** 

Poor diet quality, low in takes of fruits and vegetables in daily life, low intake of vitamin E, overweight and obesity, high intake of salt preserve food, alcohol conception can lead to the growth of the cervical cancer. Vitamin B12, thiamine, riboflavin, folate, and folate may protect the cervix against precancerous lesions. 53 

Recent years have seen a renewed focus on the importance of dietary variables in the development of cervical cancer has received a lot of attention, and multiple 

 research projects have analyzed this issue via inconsistent data derived from diverse sources. 54 A balanced diet and increased αand γ-tocopherol levels have been linked to a 50% reduction in cervical cancer. Maintaining a healthy lifestyle can lead to elevated levels of free-radical fighters, which can play a crucial role in avoiding cervical tumour.^55 Prevention Cervical malignancy prevention is a critical aspect of public health aimed at reducing Frequency rate and Fatality rate associated with this disease and Prevention of the cervical cancer are classified into two stages primary prevention, secondary prevention. 56 major prevention: This step focuses on preventing HPV, which is the major cause of cervical malignancy, by vaccination. The vaccination is highly successful strategy to stop cervical malignancy before it starts against the HPV types. 57 The first HPV vaccine to be approved was Gardasil, which was licensed in 2006. Gardasil provides protection against HPV subtypes 6, 11, 16, and 18. Subsequently, Cervarix was licensed in 2009 and confers immunity against HPV strains 16 and 18. 58 The placebo control trials of three difference HPV vaccine have come with hope and energy to fight against the cervical cancer^57 Consuming enough whole vegetables and fruits, seafood, and nuts can dramatically reduce the incidence of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. The aforementioned foods include antioxidants that include vitamin C, E, carotene, lutein, and lycopene, as well as vitamin A, calcium, and polyunsaturated fatty acids. 56 Secondary prevention this stage focuses on the prevention of early detection through regular screening such as pap smear and HPV test. These tests can detect the precancerous changes in the service. There are no randomized trials to evaluate the importance of screening on cervical cancer, prevalence and mortality^59 and all the data of the screening effect came from the group and case control studies. the reduction in the cervical cancer conducted by the international agency for research in Cancer published in 1986 they show that the wellorganized programs very effective and good for the reducing the cervical cancer family medication and treatment can easily prevent the medicine of the cervical cancer^60 Screening Cervical cancer is a major cause of illness and death for women globally concerning globe; however, it is a curable disease and many programs have helped a lot to reduce the death rate., with advancements of technology specially in health sector, and in medical science, example screening methods have emerged serves as an effective tools and powerful way to fight against cervical cancer.^61 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 78 

Since routine screening is the most impactful population health interventions. strategy for lowering morality and rates of new cervical cancer cases. Early-stage cervical cancer or precancerous lesions can be easily detectable by different kinds of screening programs, which facilitates immediate intervention and treatment, therefore screening greatly helps to improve public health. 

There are two most popular screening methods which are profound to be most effective and useful techniques among the variety of tests and these two techniques able to detect abnormal changes in the cervix that may indicate the development precancerous conditions, are 1st is Papanicolaou (Pap) smear and 2nd is HPV testing.^62 

**1. Pap smear test:** For early detection of cervical cancer, Pap smears are the most economical screening method. Sometime used with combination of HPV testing for better result. In the 1940s Dr. George Papanicolaou was the 1st who developed the Papanicolaou test and hence since then became a staple of cervical cancer preventive programs worldwide. Whenever this test is used in all populations and adequately examined, there is a clear correlation between increased cervical cancer screening rates and a corresponding reduction in both the incidence and mortality rates of cervical cancer. 63 

A Pap smear involves a medical professional who collects the sample of the cervix cells gently with the help of a brush or a small spatula. The collection process is often quick and painless, although some women might feel minor discomfort. The collected cells are then placed on a glass slide or in a liquid media for analysis. 64 

The frequency of Pap smear screening varies depending on sexual history, age and previous screening results. Women should start pap smear screening at the of 21 and also recommended to continue until the age of 65. The screening frequencies can differ, with some guidelines advising screening in every three years for women aged 21 to 29 and every three to five years for the women aged between 30 to 65.^61 

Those women with abnormal test result, such as A Colposcopy test was recommended for ASCUS (atypical squamous cells of unknown significance), HSIL (high grade squamous intraepithelial lesion), and LSIL (low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion). 64 

Limit of pap test; The Pap test easily detects the high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) with a sensitivity of 70.80%. Although pap test is a screening tool, Its falsenegative frequency for cervical cancer ranges from 15% to 25% cancer. These False-positive reports can result in unneeded procedures and additional therapies and patient anxiety. 63 

**2. HPV testing:** HPV DNA test is currently considered as the gold standard for identification of HPV virus. HPV DNA test is more reproducible than cytology and only detects high- risk HPV strains. There are numerous HPV tests that are available for screening such as: DNA-based tests and RNA- 

 based tests. In DNA-based tests cervical cell samples are tested from cervix for HPV DNA presence using these methods. With regard to high-risk HPV varieties, they are extremely sensitive and specific. In RNA-based tests few newer tests detect HPV mRNA, which is indicative of active HPV infection. 65 To increase the sensitivity and specificity of cervical cancer screening, HPV testing is often combined with Pap smear screening. This method is called co-testing, that enables the detection of high-risk HPV strains as well as abnormal cellular mutations. If women have both positive HPV test and negative cytology in that case Women should either retake the co-test in a year or receive urgent access to HPV genotype-specific testing for HPV 16 or HPV 16 and 18. 66 Treatment 

 The course of medication for cervical cancer is determined by the stage or progression of the disease, patient health and other factors such as age. There are many treatments options for cervical carcinoma. One popular method of treating cancer is surgery, in this they remove the cancerous tissue, there are different types of surgical procedure used depending upon the stage or severity and location of the cancer. Conization is a type of surgery which involves removing a Cone-shaped cervical tissue. In hysterectomy uterus is removed along with the nearby organs. Simple, modified radical, or radical hysterectomy are also possible options. Pelvic exenteration involves removing the cervix and in more severe cases the rectum, bladder, and a portion of vagina is removed last is radial trachelectomy in which uterus is intact, but cervix is removed. 67 Nano technology shows significant development in the past few years which increases the effectiveness of nanotechnology for treatment or medication of cancer, with very less harmful effect. Nano technology increased the bioavailability of particular drug, with specific targeted distribution of drug in the site of action. There are different types of nano carriers, such as liposomes, solid lipid nano particles (SLNs), polymer nano particles (PNPs), and nano emulsions, that have shown interest in treating cervix cancer. These systems can encapsulate and release proteins, genes, vaccinations, and medications etc.^68 Chemotherapy: Drugs are used to either eradicate or inhibit the growth of cancer cells. Radiation therapy is often given alongside chemotherapy, a combined treatment known as chemoradiation. When cervical cancer has progressed to later stages or has spread outside the cervix, it is frequently used. One of the most often prescribed chemotherapeutic agents for cervical cancer is cisplatin. It shows its mechanism of action by damaging the DNA of virus. cisplatin is widely utilized in the traditional procedure of metastatic cancer of cervix and nonmetastatic cervical cancer with local progression; it can also be used in conjunction with other chemotherapeutic medications.^69 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 79 

5-FU is a pyrimidine analog, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-FU resembles the building blocks of DNA and RNA. After 5-FU enters cancer cells, it is transformed into active metabolites that obstruct DNA and RNA synthesis of cancer cells, hence inhibiting cancer cell development and leading to cell death. The most popular regimens for chemotherapy and the standard concurrent chemotherapy regimen used in combination with radiation therapy for cervical cancer typically involves the administration of cisplatin at a dose of either 40 mg/m2 or 50 mg/m2, followed by a continuous intravenous infusion of fluorouracil (4 g/m2 over 96 hours) on days 1 and 29 of the radiation treatment course. 70 

natural products are found in nature or from living species such as herbs-shrubs & animals, have APIs are said to provide appealing substitutes for chemotherapy medicines or to be useful in conjunction with them for example Purified flaxseed hydrolysate, for instance, which is isolated from Lignan, inhibits the growth of angiogenesis and the spread of HeLa (immortal) cells, while inducing death. In SiHa and CaSki cells, nigella sativa thymoquinone also demonstrated an apoptotic effect and an antiproliferative effect. Praeruptorin-B, ethanol extracts from Bauhinia variegate candida, and popular tea are examples of such natural compounds.^71 

**CONCLUSION** 

Cervical cancer remains a significant global health concern. Through this review, we have explored several facets of the illness, such as hazard factor, techniques for screening, types of therapy, and preventative measures. The review underscores the importance of understanding the identification of clinical feature, etiology, risk factors connected to cervical carcinoma, notably persistent Early sexual debut age, smoking, parity, and HPV infection, emphasizes the need of comprehensive prevention strategies. While HPV vaccination has demonstrated efficacy in reducing the incidence in cervical neoplasm, for expanded vaccination programs there is critical need to reach vulnerable populations worldwide. Improved version of screening methods, HPV DNA testing and Pap smear tests, greatly increased accuracy of cervical carcinoma early detection but the main issue is poor infrastructure for screening, restricted access to screening services for poor people and last sociocultural barriers continue to exist and impede the efficacy of screening initiatives. Efforts should be taken from the individual country governments to make it possible better health and necessary requirement for women and to increase awareness, lessen stigma, and support sexual and reproductive health education Governments, medical professionals and researchers must work together to reduce cervical cancer's effects and eventually eradicate this preventable illness. 

**Source of Support:** The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article 

 Conflict of Interest: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. REFERENCES 1.Buskwofie A, David-West G, Clare CA. A review of cervical cancer: incidence and disparities. Journal of the National Medical Association. 2020 Apr 1;112(2):229-32. 2.Arbyn M, Weiderpass E, Bruni L, de Sanjosé S, Saraiya M, Ferlay J, Bray F. Estimates of incidence and mortality of cervical cancer in 2018: a worldwide analysis. The Lancet Global Health. 2020 Feb 1;8(2):e191-203. 3.Moore DH. Cervical cancer. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2006 May 1;107(5):1152-61. 4.Sawaya GF, Smith-McCune K, Kuppermann M. Cervical cancer screening: more choices in 2019. Jama. 2019 May 28;321(20):2018-9. 5.Cohen PA, Jhingran A, Oaknin A, Denny L. Cervical cancer. The Lancet. 2019 Jan 12;393(10167):169-82. 6.Waggoner SE. Cervical cancer. The lancet. 2003 Jun 28;361(9376):2217-25. 7.Canfell K. Towards the global elimination of cervical cancer. Papillomavirus research. 2019 Dec 1;8:100170. 2003 8.Hussain A, Ahsan F. The vagina as a route for systemic drug delivery. Journal of controlled release. 2005 Mar 21;103(2):30113. 9.Siddique SA. Vaginal anatomy and physiology. Urogynecology. Nov 1;9(6):263-72. 10.Levin RJ. The involvement of the human cervix in reproduction and sex. Sexual and Relationship Therapy. 2005 May 1;20(2):25160. 

11. Ludmir J, Sehdev HM. Anatomy and physiology of the uterine cervix. Clinical obstetrics and gynecology. 2000 Sep 1;43(3):433- 9. 12.Uldbjerg N, Ulmsten U. 3 The physiology of cervical ripening and cervical dilatation and the effect of abortifacient drugs. Bailliere's clinical obstetrics and gynaecology. 1990 Jun 1;4(2):263-82. 

13. Jordan J, Singer A, Jones H, Shafi M, editors. The cervix. John Wiley & Sons; 2009 Apr 8. 14.Public knowledge and attitudes towards Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccination Charlotte Devereaux Walsh2, Aradhana Gera2, Meeraj Shah2, Amit Sharma2, Judy E Powell3 and Sue Wilson*1 15.Kroupis C, Vourlidis N. Human papilloma virus (HPV) molecular diagnostics. Clinical chemistry and laboratory medicine. 2011 Nov 1;49(11):1783-99. 16.Mammas IN, Sourvinos G, Spandidos DA. Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection in children and adolescents. European journal of pediatrics. 2009 Mar;168:267-73. 17.Furumoto H, Irahara M. Human papilloma virus (HPV) and cervical cancer. Journal of Medical Investigation. 2002 Aug 1;49(3/4):124-33. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 80 

18.Tomaić V. Functional roles of E6 and E7 oncoproteins in HPVinduced malignancies at diverse anatomical sites. Cancers. 2016 Oct 19;8(10):95. 

19.Morshed K, Polz-Gruszka D, Szymański M, Polz-Dacewicz M. Human papillomavirus (HPV)–structure, epidemiology and pathogenesis. Otolaryngologia Polska. 2014 Sep 1;68(5):213-9. 

20.Stapley S, Hamilton W. Gynaecological symptoms reported by young women: examining the potential for earlier diagnosis of cervical cancer. Family practice. 2011 Dec 1;28(6):592-8. 

21.Singh S, Narayan N, Sinha R, Sinha P, Sinha VP, Upadhye JJ. Awareness about cervical cancer risk factors and symptoms. Int J Reprod Contracept Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Dec 1;7(12):4987-91. 

22.Issah F, Maree JE, Mwinituo PP. Expressions of cervical cancerrelated signs and symptoms. European Journal of Oncology Nursing. 2011 Feb 1;15(1):67-72. 

23.Tornatta JM, Carpenter JS, Schilder J, Cardenes HR. Representations of vaginal symptoms in cervical cancer survivors. Cancer Nursing. 2009 Sep 1;32(5):378-84. 

24.Beharee N, Shi Z, Wu D, Wang J. Diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer in pregnant women. Cancer medicine. 2019 Sep;8(12):5425-30. 

25.Johnson CA, James D, Marzan A, Armaos M. Cervical cancer: an overview of pathophysiology and management. InSeminars in oncology nursing 2019 Apr 1 (Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 166-174). WB Saunders. 

26.Fonseca-Moutinho JA. Smoking and cervical cancer. International Scholarly Research Notices. 2011;2011. 

27. Marshall JR, Graham S, Byers T, Swanson M, Brasure J. Diet and smoking in the epidemiology of cancer of the cervix. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1983 May 1;70(5):847-51. 

28.Roura E, Castellsague X, Pawlita M, Travier N, Waterboer T, Margall N, Bosch FX, De Sanjosé S, Dillner J, Gram IT, Tjønneland A. Smoking as a major risk factor for cervical cancer and pre‐ cancer: Results from the EPIC cohort. International journal of cancer. 2014 Jul 15;135(2):453-66. 

29.Winkelstein Jr WA. Smoking and cancer of the uterine cervix: hypothesis. American journal of epidemiology. 1977 Oct;106(4):257-9. 

30.Bosch FX, Muñoz N. The viral etiology of cervical cancer. Virus research. 2002 Nov 1;89(2):183-90. 

31.Burd EM. Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer. Clinical microbiology reviews. 2003 Jan;16(1):1-7. 

32.Bruni L, Diaz M, Castellsagué M, Ferrer E, Bosch FX, de Sanjosé S. Cervical human papillomavirus prevalence in 5 continents: meta-analysis of 1 million women with normal cytological findings. Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2010 Dec 15;202(12):1789-99. 

33.Ghim SJ, Basu PS, Jenson A. Cervical cancer: etiology, pathogenesis, treatment, and future vaccines. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2002 Jul;3(3):207-14. 

34.Koskela P, Anttila T, Bjørge T, Brunsvig A, Dillner J, Hakama M, Hakulinen T, Jellum E, Lehtinen M, Lenner P, Luostarinen T. Chlamydia trachomatis infection as a risk factor for invasive cervical cancer. International journal of cancer. 2000 Jan 1;85(1):35-9. 

 35.Silva J, Cerqueira F, Medeiros R. Chlamydia trachomatis infection: implications for HPV status and cervical cancer. Archives of gynecology and obstetrics. 2014 Apr;289:715-23. 36.Mbulawa ZZ, Marais DJ, Johnson LF, Boulle A, Coetzee D, Williamson AL. Influence of human immunodeficiency virus and CD4 count on the prevalence of human papillomavirus in heterosexual couples. Journal of general virology. 2010 Dec;91(12):3023-31. 37.Pantanowitz L, Michelow P. Review of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and squamous lesions of the uterine cervix. Diagnostic cytopathology. 2011 Jan;39(1):65-72. 38.Louie KS, De Sanjose S, Diaz M, Castellsagué X, Herrero R, Meijer CJ, Shah K, Franceschi S, Muñoz N, Bosch FX. Early age at first sexual intercourse and early pregnancy are risk factors for cervical cancer in developing countries. British journal of cancer. 2009 Apr;100(7):1191-7. 39.Edelstein ZR, Madeleine MM, Hughes JP, Johnson LG, Schwartz SM, Galloway DA, Carter JJ, Koutsky LA. Age of diagnosis of squamous cell cervical carcinoma and early sexual experience. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2009 Apr 1;18(4):1070-6. 40.Cohen PA, Jhingran A, Oaknin A, Denny L. Cervical cancer. The Lancet. 2019 Jan 12;393(10167):169-82. 

41. Pecorelli S. Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2009;105:107-8. 

42. Šarenac T, Mikov M. Cervical cancer, different treatments and importance of bile acids as therapeutic agents in this disease. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2019 Jun 4;10:445912. 

43. Lea JS, Lin KY. Cervical cancer. Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinics. 2012 Jun 1;39(2):233-53. 

44. Devine C, Viswanathan C, Faria S, Marcal L, Sagebiel TL. Imaging and staging of cervical cancer. InSeminars in Ultrasound, CT and MRI 2019 Aug 1 (Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 280-286). WB Saunders. 

45. Benedet JL, Pecorelli S, Ngan HY, Hacker NF, Denny L, Jones III HW, Kavanagh J, Kitchener H, Kohorn E, Thomas G. Staging classifications and clinical practice guidelines for gynaecological cancers. International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics. 2000;70:207-312. 

46. Hildesheim A, Herrero R, Castle PE, Wacholder S, Bratti MC, Sherman ME, Lorincz AT, Burk RD, Morales J, Rodriguez AC, Helgesen K. HPV co-factors related to the development of cervical cancer: results from a population-based study in Costa Rica. British journal of cancer. 2001 May;84(9):1219-26. 

47. Jensen KE, Schmiedel S, Norrild B, Frederiksen K, Iftner T, Kjaer SK. Parity as a cofactor for high-grade cervical disease among women with persistent human papillomavirus infection: a 13-year follow-up. British journal of cancer. 2013 Jan;108(1):234- 9. 

48. Alsbeih G. Exploring the causes of the low incidence of cervical cancer in Western Asia. Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention: APJCP. 2018;19(6):1425. 

49. Hull R, Mbele M, Makhafola T, Hicks C, Wang SM, Reis RM, Mehrotra R, Mkhize‑Kwitshana Z, Kibiki G, Bates DO, Dlamini Z. Cervical cancer in low and middle‑income countries. Oncology letters. 2020 Sep 1;20(3):2058-74. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research Available online at http://www.globalresearchonline.net 

## 81 

50.La Vecchia C, Boccia S. Oral contraceptives, human papillomavirus and cervical cancer. European journal of cancer prevention. 2014 Mar 1;23(2):110-2. 

51.Asthana S, Busa V, Labani S. Oral contraceptives use and risk of cervical cancer—A systematic review & meta-analysis. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology. 2020 Apr 1;247:163-75. 

52.Moreno V, Bosch FX, Muñoz N, Meijer CJ, Shah KV, Walboomers JM, Herrero R, Franceschi S. Effect of oral contraceptives on risk of cervical cancer in women with human papillomavirus infection: the IARC multicentric case-control study. The Lancet. 2002 Mar 30;359(9312):1085-92. 

53.García‐Closas R, Castellsagué X, Bosch X, González CA. The role of diet and nutrition in cervical carcinogenesis: a review of recent evidence. International journal of cancer. 2005 Nov 20;117(4):629-37. 

54. Potischman N, Brinton LA. Nutrition and cervical neoplasia. Cancer Causes & Control. 1996 Jan;7:113-26. 

55.Momenimovahed Z, Salehiniya H. Incidence, mortality and risk factors of cervical cancer in the world. Biomedical Research and Therapy. 2017 Dec 8;4(12):1795-811. 

56.Rock CL, Michael CW, Reynolds RK, Ruffin MT. Prevention of cervix cancer. Critical reviews in oncology/hematology. 2000 Mar 1;33(3):169-85. 

57. Denny L. Prevention of cervical cancer. Reproductive Health Matters. 2008 Jan 1;16(32):18-31. 

58. Aggarwal P. Cervical cancer: can it be prevented?. World journal of clinical oncology. 2014 Oct 10;5(4):775. 

59. Denny L. The prevention of cervical cancer in developing countries. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 2005 Sep;112(9):1204-12. 

60. Denny L, Sankaranarayanan R. Secondary prevention of cervical cancer. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics. 2006 Nov 1;94:S65-70. 

61. Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. Recommendations on screening for cervical cancer. Cmaj. 2013 Jan 8;185(1):35-45. 

62. Peirson L, Fitzpatrick-Lewis D, Ciliska D, Warren R. Screening for cervical cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Systematic reviews. 2013 Dec;2:1-4. 

63. Janicek MF, Averette HE. Cervical cancer: prevention, diagnosis, and therapeutics. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2001 Mar;51(2):92-114. 

64. Sachan PL, Singh M, Patel ML, Sachan R. A study on cervical cancer screening using pap smear test and clinical correlation. Asia-Pacific journal of oncology nursing. 2018 Jul 1;5(3):337-41. 

65. McGraw SL, Ferrante JM. Update on prevention and screening of cervical cancer. World journal of clinical oncology. 2014 Oct 10;5(4):744. 

66. Tsikouras P, Zervoudis S, Manav B, Tomara E, Iatrakis G, Romanidis C, Bothou A, Galazios G. Cervical cancer: screening, diagnosis and staging. J buon. 2016 Mar 1;21(2):320-5. 

67. Small Jr W, Bacon MA, Bajaj A, Chuang LT, Fisher BJ, Harkenrider MM, Jhingran A, Kitchener HC, Mileshkin LR, Viswanathan AN, Gaffney DK. Cervical cancer: a global health crisis. Cancer. 2017 Jul 1;123(13):2404-12. 

68. Medina-Alarcón KP, Voltan AR, Fonseca-Santos B, Moro IJ, de Oliveira Souza F, Chorilli M, Soares CP, Dos Santos AG, Mendes- Giannini MJ, Fusco-Almeida AM. Highlights in nanocarriers for the treatment against cervical cancer. Materials Science and Engineering: C. 2017 Nov 1;80:748-59. 

69. Eifel PJ. Chemoradiotherapy in the treatment of cervical cancer. InSeminars in radiation oncology 2006 Jul 1 (Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 177-185). WB Saunders. 

70. Long III HJ, Laack NN, Gostout BS. Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cervical cancer. InMayo Clinic Proceedings 2007; 82(12):1566-1574. 

71. Park SH, Kim M, Lee S, Jung W, Kim B. Therapeutic potential of natural products in treatment of cervical cancer: a review. Nutrients. 2021 Jan 5;13(1):154-61. 

 For any questions related to this article, please reach us at: globalresearchonline@rediffmail.com New manuscripts for publication can be submitted at: submit@globalresearchonline.net and submit_ijpsrr@rediffmail.com 


