## cancer.org | 1.800.227.2345 

# Treating Cervical Cancer 

If you've been diagnosed with cervical cancer, your cancer care team will talk with you about treatment options. In choosing your treatment plan, you and your cancer care team will also take into account your age, your overall health, and your personal preferences. 

**How is cervical cancer treated?** 

Common types of treatments for cervical cancer include: 

 lSurgery for Cervical Cancer l Radiation Therapy for Cervical Cancer l Chemotherapy for Cervical Cancer l Targeted Drug Therapy for Cervical Cancer l Immunotherapy for Cervical Cancer 

**Common treatment approaches** 

Depending on the type and stage of your cancer, you may need more than one type of treatment. For the earliest stages of cervical cancer, either surgery or radiation combined with chemo may be used. For later stages, radiation combined with chemo is usually the main treatment. Chemo (by itself) is often used to treat advanced cervical cancer. 

 lTreatment Options for Cervical Cancer, by Stage 

**Who treats cervical cancer?** 

Doctors on your cancer treatment team may include: 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 l A gynecologist: a doctor who treats diseases of the female reproductive system A gynecologic oncologist: a doctor who specializes in cancers of the female reproductive system who can perform surgery and prescribe chemotherapy and other medicines 

 l 

 l A radiation oncologist: a doctor who uses radiation to treat cancer A medical oncologist: a doctor who uses chemotherapy and other medicines to treat cancer 

 l 

Many other specialists may be involved in your care as well, including nurse practitioners, nurses, psychologists, social workers, rehabilitation specialists, and other health professionals. 

 lHealth Professionals Who Are Part of a Cancer Care Team 

**Making treatment decisions** 

It's important to discuss all of your treatment options, including their goals and possible side effects, with your doctors to help make the decisions that best fit your needs. It’s also very important to ask questions if there’s anything you’re not sure about. Although the choice of treatment depends largely on the stage of the disease at the time of diagnosis, other factors that may influence your options are your age, your general health, your individual circumstances, and your preferences. Cervical cancer can affect your sex life and your ability to have children. These concerns should also be considered as you make treatment decisions. Be sure that you understand all the risks and side effects of the various treatments before making a decision. 

If time permits, it is often a good idea to seek a second opinion. A second opinion can give you more information and help you feel more confident about the treatment plan you choose. 

 lQuestions to Ask About Cervical Cancer l Fertility l Seeking a Second Opinion 

**Thinking about taking part in a clinical trial** 

Clinical trials are carefully controlled research studies that are done to get a closer look at promising new treatments or procedures. Clinical trials are one way to get state-ofthe art cancer treatment. In some cases they may be the only way to get access to newer treatments. They are also the best way for doctors to learn better methods to 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
treat cancer. 

If you would like to learn more about clinical trials that might be right for you, start by asking your doctor if your clinic or hospital conducts clinical trials. 

 lClinical Trials 

**Considering complementary, integrative, and alternative methods** 

You may hear about alternative or complementary methods to relieve symptoms or treat your cancer that your doctors haven’t mentioned. These methods can include vitamins, herbs, and special diets, or other methods such as acupuncture or massage, to name a few. 

**Complementary** methods are treatments that are used **along with** your regular medical care. **Alternative** treatments are used **instead of** standard medical treatment. Although some of these methods might be helpful in relieving symptoms or helping you feel better, many have not been proven to work. Some might even be harmful. For example, some supplements might interfere with chemotherapy. 

Be sure to talk to your cancer care team about any method you are thinking about using. They can help you learn what is known (or not known) about the method, which can help you make an informed decision. 

 lComplementary and Integrative Medicine 

**Help getting through cancer treatment** 

People with cancer need support and information, no matter what stage of illness they may be in. Knowing all of your options and finding the resources you need will help you make informed decisions about your care. 

Whether you are thinking about treatment, getting treatment, or not being treated at all, you can still get supportive care to help with pain or other symptoms. Communicating with your cancer care team is important so you understand your diagnosis, what treatment is recommended, and ways to maintain or improve your quality of life. 

Different types of programs and support services may be helpful, and they can be an important part of your care. These might include nursing or social work services, financial aid, nutritional advice, rehab, or spiritual help. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
The American Cancer Society also has programs and services including rides to treatment, lodging, and more to help you get through treatment. Call our Cancer Knowledge Hub at 1-800-227-2345 and speak with one of our caring, trained cancer helpline specialists. Or, if you prefer, you can use our chat feature on cancer.org to connect with one of our specialists. 

 lPalliative Care l Programs & Services 

**Choosing to stop treatment or choosing no treatment at all** 

For some people, when treatments have been tried and are no longer controlling the cancer, it could be time to weigh the benefits and risks of continuing to try new treatments. Whether or not you continue treatment, there are still things you can do to help maintain or improve your quality of life. 

Some people, especially if the cancer is advanced, might not want to be treated at all. There are many reasons you might decide not to get cancer treatment, but it’s important to talk to your doctors as you make that decision. Remember that even if you choose not to treat the cancer, you can still get supportive care to help with pain or other symptoms. 

People who have advanced cancer and who are expected to live less than 6 months may want to consider hospice care. Hospice care is designed to provide the best possible quality of life for people who are near the end of life. You and your family are encouraged to talk with your doctor or a member of your supportive care team about hospice care options, which include hospice care at home, a special hospice center, or other health care locations. Nursing care and special equipment can make staying at home a workable option for many families. 

 lIf Cancer Treatments Stop Working l Hospice Care 

_The treatment information given here is not official policy of the American Cancer Society and is not intended as medical advice to replace the expertise and judgment of your cancer care team. It is intended to help you and your family make informed decisions, together with your doctor. Your doctor may have reasons for suggesting a treatment plan different from these general treatment options. Don't hesitate to ask your cancer care team any questions you may have about your treatment options._ 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Surgery for Cervical Cancer 

Many women with cervical cancer will have some type of surgery. Surgery can be used to: 

 lHelp diagnose cervical cancer l Help determine how far the cancer has spread l Help treat the cancer (especially for early-stage cancers) 

 l Surgery for cervical pre-cancers l Surgery for invasive cervical cancer l Surgery to remove nearby lymph nodes l More information about surgery 

## Surgery for cervical pre-cancers 

Two types of procedures can be used to treat pre-cancers of the cervix: 

 Ablation destroys cervical tissue with cold temperatures (cryosurgery) or with a laser^1 (laser ablation) rather than removing it. 

 l 

 l Excisional surgery (conization) cuts out and removes the pre-cancer. 

**Cryosurgery** 

Cryosurgery is a type of ablation where a very cold metal probe is placed directly on the cervix. This kills the abnormal cells by freezing them. It is used to treat cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). This can be done in a doctor’s office or clinic. After cryosurgery, you may have a watery brown discharge for a few weeks. 

**Laser ablation** 

Laser ablation directs a focused laser beam through the vagina to vaporize (burn off) abnormal cells. This might be done in a doctor’s office under local anesthesia (numbing medicine) or in the operating room with general anesthesia since it can cause more 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
discomfort than cryotherapy. It is also used to treat cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). 

**Conization** 

Another way to treat cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) is with excisional surgery called **conization**. The doctor removes a cone-shaped piece of tissue from the cervix. The tissue removed in the cone includes the transformation zone where cervical precancers and cancers are most likely to start. A cone biopsy is not only used to diagnose pre-cancers and cancers. It can also be used as a treatment since it can sometimes completely remove pre-cancers and some very early cancers. 

The procedure can be done in different ways: 

 lUsing a surgical blade (cold knife cone biopsy) l Using a laser beam (laser conization) Using a thin wire heated by electricity (the loop electrosurgical excision procedure, LEEP or LEETZ procedure). 

 l 

## Surgery for invasive cervical cancer 

Procedures to treat invasive cervical cancer are: 

 lHysterectomy (simple or radical) l Trachelectomy 

**Simple hysterectomy** 

A simple hysterectomy removes the uterus (both the body of the uterus and the cervix) but not the structures next to the uterus (parametria and uterosacral ligaments). The vagina and pelvic lymph nodes are not removed. The ovaries are usually left in place unless there is another reason to remove them. 

Simple hysterectomy can be used to treat certain types of severe CIN or certain types of very early cervical cancer. 

There are different ways to do a hysterectomy: 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Abdominal hysterectomy: The uterus is removed through a surgical incision in the front of the abdomen. 

 l 

 l Vaginal hysterectomy: The uterus is removed through the vagina. Laparoscopic hysterectomy: The uterus is removed using laparoscopy. First, a thin tube with a tiny video camera at the end (the laparoscope) is inserted into one or more very small surgical incisions made on the abdominal wall to see inside the abdomen and pelvis. Small instruments can be controlled through the tube(s), so the surgeon can cut around the uterus without making a large cut in the abdomen. The uterus is then removed through a cut in the vagina. 

 l 

 Robotic-assisted surgery: In this approach, the laparoscopy is done with special tools attached to robotic arms that are controlled by the doctor to help perform precise surgery. 

 l 

General anesthesia is used for all of these operations. 

For a laparoscopic or vaginal hysterectomy, the hospital stay is usually 1 to 2 days, followed by a 2to 3-week recovery period. A hospital stay of 3 to 5 days is common for an abdominal hysterectomy, and complete recovery takes about 4 to 6 weeks. 

**Possible side effects:** Any type of hysterectomy results in infertility (inability to have children). Complications could include bleeding, infection, or damage to the urinary or intestinal systems, such as the bladder or colon. 

Hysterectomy does not change the ability to feel sexual pleasure. The uterus and cervix are not needed for someone to reach an orgasm. The area around the clitoris and the lining of the vagina remain as sensitive as before a hysterectomy. More information about managing the sexual side effects of cervical cancer treatment can be found in Sexual Side Effects^2. 

**Radical hysterectomy** 

For this operation, the surgeon removes the uterus along with the tissues next to the uterus (the parametria and the uterosacral ligaments), the cervix, and the upper part (about 1 inch [2-3cm]) of the vagina next to the cervix. The ovaries are not removed unless there is some other medical reason to do so. More tissue is removed in a radical hysterectomy than in a **simple** hysterectomy, so the hospital stay may be longer. Often, some pelvic lymph nodes are removed as well. (This procedure, known as **lymph node dissection** , is covered later in this section.) 

This surgery is usually done through a large abdominal incision (also known as open 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
surgery). 

A radical hysterectomy can also be done using laparoscopy or robot-assistance. (See the Simple hysterectomy section for a description of laparoscopy.) These techniques are also referred to as **minimally invasive surgery**. Laparoscopic (or robotic) surgery can result in less pain, less blood loss during the operation, and a shorter hospital stay compared to open surgery. However, studies have shown that patients who have minimally invasive radical hysterectomies for cervical cancer have a higher chance of the cancer recurring and a higher risk of dying from the cancer than those who have surgery through an abdominal incision (open surgery). Having a radical hysterectomy through an abdominal cut is the preferred type of surgery in most cases. Laparoscopic surgery may still be an option for a small specific group of patients with early-stage cancer, but you should discuss your options carefully with your doctor. 

A **modified radical hysterectomy** is similar to a radical hysterectomy but does not remove as much of the vagina and tissues next to the uterus (the parametria and the uterosacral ligaments) and lymph nodes are usually not removed. 

**Possible side effects:** Because the uterus is removed, this surgery results in infertility. Because some of the nerves to the bladder are removed, some patients have problems emptying their bladder after this operation and may need a catheter for a time. Complications could include bleeding, infection, or damage to the urinary and intestinal systems such as the bladder or colon. 

When some of the lymph nodes are removed to check for cancer, lymphedema^3 (leg swelling) might be a result. This is not common, but may happen after surgery and treated with different methods. 

Radical hysterectomy does not change the ability to feel sexual pleasure. Although the vagina is shortened, the area around the clitoris and the lining of the vagina is as sensitive as before. A uterus or cervix is not needed to reach orgasm. When cancer has caused pain or bleeding with intercourse, the hysterectomy may actually improve a sex life by stopping these symptoms. 

**Trachelectomy** 

A **radical trachelectomy** , allows you to be treated without losing your ability to have children. The operation is done either through the vagina or the abdomen, and is sometimes done using laparoscopy or a robot. 

This procedure removes the cervix and the upper part of the vagina but not the body of the uterus. The surgeon then places a permanent "purse-string" stitch inside the uterine 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
cavity to keep the opening of the uterus closed, the way the cervix normally would. 

The nearby lymph nodes are also removed using laparoscopy which may require another incision (cut). The operation is done either through the vagina or the abdomen. 

After trachelectomy, some are able to carry a pregnancy to term and deliver a healthy baby by cesarean section, although those who have had this surgery might have a higher risk of miscarriage. 

**Pelvic exenteration** 

This operation is done for very specific cases of recurrent cervical cancer. In this surgery, all of the same organs and tissues are removed as in a radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection. (Lymph node dissection is discussed in the next section.) In addition, the bladder, vagina, rectum, and part of the colon are also removed, depending on where the cancer has spread. 

If your bladder is removed, you will need a new way to store and get rid of urine. This usually means using a short piece of intestine to function as a new bladder. The new bladder may be connected to the abdominal wall so that urine is drained periodically when the patient places a catheter into a urostomy (a small opening). Or urine drains continuously into a small plastic bag attached to the front of the abdomen. For more information, see Urostomy Guide^4. 

If the rectum and part of the colon are removed, a new way to get rid of fecal waste must be created. This is done by attaching the remaining intestine to the abdominal wall 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
so that fecal material can pass through a small opening (stoma) into a small plastic bag worn on the front of the abdomen (more information about colostomies can be found in Colostomy Guide^5 ). In some cases, it may be possible to remove the cancerous part of the colon (next to the cervix) and reconnect the colon ends so that no bags or external appliances are needed. 

If the vagina is removed, a new vagina can be surgically made out of skin, intestinal tissue, or muscle and skin (myocutaneous) grafts. 

Sexual impact of pelvic exenteration 

Recovery from total pelvic exenteration takes a long time. Most people don't begin to feel like themselves again for about 6 months after surgery. Some say it takes a year or two to adjust completely. 

Nevertheless, theystill can lead happy and productive lives. With practice, they can also have sexual desire, pleasure, and orgasms. 

More information about managing the sexual side effects of cervical cancer treatment can be found in Sex and the Adult Female with Cancer^6. 

## Surgery to remove nearby lymph nodes 

**Para-aortic lymph node sampling** 

Usually during surgery for a radical hysterectomy, the lymph nodes next to the aorta (the large artery in the abdomen) are removed. This is called **para-aortic lymph node sampling.** The lymph nodes may be sent to the lab during the operation for quick testing. If the para-aortic lymph nodes show cancer, the surgery may be stopped, and systemic therapy, such as chemotherapy with or without immunotherapy, given instead. If the lymph nodes do not show cancer, then pelvic lymph nodes (see below) are usually removed and the radical hysterectomy completed. Any tissue removed during surgery will be tested to see if the cancer has spread there. If so, radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy may be recommended. 

**Pelvic lymph node dissection** 

Cancer that starts in the cervix can spread to lymph nodes in the pelvis. To check for lymph node spread, the surgeon might remove some of these lymph nodes. This procedure is known as a **pelvic lymph node dissection** or **lymph node sampling**. It is done at the same time as a hysterectomy or trachelectomy. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Removing lymph nodes can lead to fluid drainage problems in the legs. This can cause severe leg swelling, a condition called lymphedema^7. 

**Sentinel lymph node mapping and biopsy** 

Sentinel lymph node mapping and biopsy is a procedure in which the surgeon finds and removes only the lymph node(s) where the cancer would likely spread first. To do this, the surgeon injects a radioactive substance and/or a blue dye into the cervix at the beginning of the surgery. Lymphatic vessels will carry these substances along the same path that the cancer would likely take. The first lymph node(s) the dye or radioactive substance travels to will be the sentinel node(s). Removing only one or a few lymph nodes lowers the risk of side effects from the surgery, such as leg swelling that is known as lymphedema. 

After the substance has been injected, the sentinel node(s) can be found either by using a special machine to detect radioactivity in the nodes, or by looking for nodes that have turned blue. To double check, both methods are often used. The surgeon then removes the node(s) containing the dye or radioactivity. 

Sentinel lymph node mapping may be considered for certain cases of stage I cervical cancer. It is best used for tumors that are less than 2 cm (almost one inch) in size. If your surgeon is planning sentinel lymph node biopsies, you should discuss if this procedure is appropriate for you. 

Even if sentinel lymph node mapping does not show any lymph nodes to biopsy, the surgeon will most likely still remove the lymph nodes on that side of the pelvis to make sure cancer is not missed. Also, any enlarged or suspicious lymph nodes need to be removed at the time of surgery, even if they do not take up the dye. 

## More information about surgery 

For more general information about surgery as a treatment for cancer, see Cancer Surgery^8_._ 

To learn about some of the side effects listed here and how to manage them, see Managing Cancer-related Side Effects^9. 

## Hyperlinks 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/lasers-in-cancertreatment.html 

### 1. 

 2.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/sexual-side-effects.html 3.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/swelling/lymphedema.html http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatmenttypes/surgery/ostomies/urostomy.html 

### 4. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatmenttypes/surgery/ostomies/colostomy.html 

### 5. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/fertility-and-sexual-sideeffects/sexuality-for-women-with-cancer.html 

### 6. 

 7.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/swelling/lymphedema.html 8.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/surgery.html 9.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html 

**References** 

Basaran D, Leitao MM Jr. The Landmark Series: Minimally Invasive Surgery for Cervical Cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2021 Jan;28(1):204-211. doi: 10.1245/s10434-020-09265-0. Epub 2020 Oct 30. PMID: 33128120; PMCID: PMC8369473. 

Bogani G, Leone Roberti Maggiore U, Rossetti D, Ditto A, Martinelli F, Chiappa V, Ferla S, Indini A, Sabatucci I, Lorusso D, Raspagliesi F. Advances in laparoscopic surgery for cervical cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2019 Nov;143:76-80. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2019.07.021. Epub 2019 Aug 2. Erratum in: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2020 Jan;145:102833. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2019.102833. PMID: 31499276. 

Shvygin A, Manning-Geist BL, Sonoda Y. Fertility-sparing and minimally invasive surgery for early-stage cervical cancer. J Surg Oncol. 2024 Jan;129(1):112-116. doi: 10.1002/jso.27540. Epub 2023 Nov 30. PMID: 38032090. 

van der Plas RCJ, Bos AME, Jürgenliemk-Schulz IM, Gerestein CG, Zweemer RP. Fertility-sparing surgery and fertility preservation in cervical cancer: The desire for parenthood, reproductive and obstetric outcomes. Gynecol Oncol. 2021 Dec;163(3):538-544. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2021.09.003. Epub 2021 Sep 25. PMID: 34583837. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Radiation Therapy for Cervical Cancer 

Radiation therapy uses high energy x-rays to kill cancer cells. Depending on the stage of the cervical cancer, radiation therapy may be used: 

 As a part of the main treatment. For some stages of cervical cancer, the preferred treatment is radiation and chemo given together (called concurrent chemoradiation ) as the chemo helps the radiation work better. 

 l 

 To treat cervical cancer that has spread or that has come back after treatment. Radiation therapy may be used to lessen symptoms caused by cervical cancers that have spread to other organs and tissues. 

 l 

 l External beam radiation l Long-term side effects of radiation therapy l More information about radiation therapy 

The types of radiation therapy most often used to treat cervical cancer are: 

 lExternal beam radiation l Brachytherapy 

_It is important to know that smoking increases the side effects from radiation and can make treatment less effective._ **_If you smoke, you should stop._** 

## External beam radiation 

External beam radiation therapy^1 (EBRT) aims x-rays at the cancer from a machine outside the body. Treatment is much like getting a regular x-ray, but the radiation dose is stronger. 

Each radiation treatment lasts only a few minutes, but getting you into place for treatment usually takes longer. The procedure itself is painless. 

When EBRT is used as the main treatment for cervical cancer, it is usually combined with chemotherapy (called **concurrent chemoradiation** ). Often, a low dose of the chemo drug called cisplatin is used. Other chemo drugs can be used as well. The radiation treatments are given 5 days a week for about 5 weeks. The chemotherapy is given at scheduled times while radiation is being given. The schedule is determined by 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
which drug is used. If the cancer has not spread to distant areas, brachytherapy, which is discussed below, may also be given after the concurrent chemoradiation is complete. 

EBRT can also be used as the main treatment of cervical cancer in patients who can’t tolerate chemoradiation, can’t safely have surgery, or choose not to have surgery. It can also be used by itself to treat areas where the cancer spread. 

**Possible side effects of EBRT** 

Short-term side effects^2 of external beam radiation therapy for cervical cancer can include: 

 lFatigue (tiredness) l Upset stomach l Diarrhea or loose stools (if radiation is given to the pelvis or abdomen) l Nausea and vomiting l Skin changes (mild redness to peeling in the area where the radiation is given) Radiation cystitis: Radiation to the pelvis can irritate the bladder (radiation cystitis), causing discomfort, an urge to urinate often, and sometimes blood in the urine. 

 l 

 Vaginal pain: Radiation can make the vulva and vagina more sensitive and sore, and sometimes causes a discharge. 

 l 

 Menstrual changes: Pelvic radiation can affect the ovaries, leading to menstrual changes and even early menopause. 

 l 

 Low blood cell counts: Anemia (low levels of red blood cells) can make you feel tired. Neutropenia (low levels of white blood cells) increases the risks of serious infection. Thrombocytopenia (low levels of platelets) increases the risk of bleeding. 

 l 

When chemotherapy is given with radiation, the blood cell counts tend to be lower and fatigue and nausea tend to be worse. These side effects typically improve in the weeks after treatment is stopped. 

Other, long-term side effects are also possible with EBRT. These are described below. 

**Brachytherapy (internal radiation therapy)** 

Brachytherapy^3 , or internal radiation therapy, puts a source of radiation in or near the cancer. This type of radiation only travels a short distance. The type of brachytherapy used most often to treat cervical cancer is known as **intracavitary brachytherapy**. The 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
radiation source is placed in a device in the vagina (and sometimes in the cervix). Brachytherapy is mainly used in addition to EBRT as a part of the main treatment for cervical cancer. Rarely, it might be used alone in very specific cases of early-stage cervical cancers. 

There are two types of brachytherapy: 

 Low-dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy is completed over a few days. During this time, the patient stays in bed in a private room in the hospital with instruments holding the radioactive material in place. While the radiation therapy is being given, the hospital staff will care for you, but will also take precautions to avoid being exposed to radiation themselves. 

 l 

 High-dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy is done as an outpatient procedure over several treatments (often at least a week apart). For each high-dose treatment, the radioactive material is inserted for a few minutes and then removed. The advantage of HDR treatment is that you do not have to stay in the hospital or stay still for long periods of time. 

 l 

To treat cervical cancer in women who have had a hysterectomy, the radioactive material is placed in a tube in the vagina. 

To treat someone who still has a uterus, the radioactive material can be placed in a small metal tube (called a **tandem** )that goes in the uterus, along with small round metal holders ( **ovoids** ) placed near the cervix. This is sometimes called **tandem and ovoid treatment**. 

Another option is called **tandem and ring**. For this, a round holder (like a ring) is placed close to the uterus. The choice of which one to use depends on what type of brachytherapy is planned. 

**Possible short-term side effects of brachytherapy** 

Since the radiation only travels a short distance with brachytherapy, the main effects of the radiation are on the cervix and the walls of the vagina. The most common side effect is irritation of the vagina. It may become red and sore, and there may be a discharge. The vulva may become irritated as well. 

Brachytherapy can also cause many of the same side effects^4 as EBRT, such as fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, irritation of the bladder, and low blood cell counts. Often brachytherapy is given right after external beam radiation (before the side effects can go 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
away), so it can be hard to know which type of treatment is causing the side effect. 

## Long-term side effects of radiation therapy 

Side effects related to radiation can sometimes occur months to years after treatment. 

**Vaginal stenosis:** Both EBRT and brachytherapy can cause scar tissue to form in the vagina. The scar tissue can make the vagina narrower (called vaginal stenosis), less able to stretch, or even shorter, which can make vaginal sex painful. 

Vaginal stenosis can be helped or prevented by stretching the walls of the vagina several times a week, either by having sex or by using a vaginal dilator (a plastic or rubber tube used to stretch out the vagina)._._ 

**Vaginal dryness:** Vaginal dryness and painful sex can be long-term side effects from radiation (both brachytherapy and EBRT). Estrogens used locally may help with vaginal dryness and changes to the vaginal lining, especially if radiation to the pelvis damaged the ovaries, and caused early menopause. These hormones are typically applied in the vagina and absorbed into the genital area, rather than taken by mouth. They come in gel, cream, ring, and tablet forms. 

For more information on vaginal stenosis and dryness see How Radiation Therapy Can Affect Sex for Women^5. 

**Rectal bleeding/rectal stenosis:** Radiation to the rectal wall can cause chronic inflammation of the area which can lead to bleeding and sometimes stenosis (narrowing) of the rectum which can be painful. An abnormal opening (called a fistula) also may form between the rectum and vagina, causing stool to come out of the vagina. These problems typically happen during the first 3 years after radiation treatment. Additional treatments, such as surgery, may be needed to fix these complications. 

**Urinary problems:** Radiation to the pelvis can cause chronic radiation cystitis (as mentioned above), blood in the urine, or an abnormal opening between the bladder and vagina (called a **fistula** ). These side effects can be seen many years after radiation therapy. 

**Weakened bones:** Radiation to the pelvis can weaken the bones, leading to fractures. Hip fractures are the most common and might occur 2 to 4 years after radiation. Bone density tests are recommended to monitor the risk of fracture. 

**Swelling of the leg(s):** If pelvic lymph nodes are treated with radiation, it can lead to 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
fluid drainage problems in the leg. This can cause the leg to swell severely, a condition calledlymphedema^6. 

If you are having side effects from radiation treatment, discuss them with your cancer care team. 

## More information about radiation therapy 

To learn more about how radiation is used to treat cancer, see Radiation Therapy^7. 

To learn about some of the side effects listed here and how to manage them, see Managing Cancer-related Side Effects^8. 

## Hyperlinks 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/radiation/externalbeam-radiation-therapy.html 

### 1. 

 2.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/radiation/internalradiation-therapy-brachytherapy.html 

### 3. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/radiation/effects-ondifferent-parts-of-body.html 

### 4. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/sexual-side-effects/pelvicradiation.html 

### 5. 

 6.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/swelling/lymphedema.html 7.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/radiation.html 8.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Chemotherapy for Cervical Cancer 

Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Cervical Cancer. Version 3.2024. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org on June 8, 2024. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 

Chemotherapy (chemo) drugs given intravenously (into a vein) or by mouth are called **systemic chemotherapy**. The drugs enter the bloodstream and reach throughout the body, making this treatment useful for cancers that have spread. 

 lChemo drugs commonly used to treat cervical cancer l Chemo side effects l More information about chemotherapy 

## Chemo drugs commonly used to treat cervical cancer 

Treatment choices are made based on each person's needs. Drugs that have been used include: 

 l Cisplatin l Carboplatin l Bevacizumab (Avastin) l Paclitaxel (Taxol®) l Topotecan (Hycamtin) l Docetaxel (Taxotere) l Fluorouracil (5-FU) 

These drugs can be given: 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 At the same time as radiation (for cancer that has not spread to other parts of the body) 

 l 

 l Alone (if cancer has already spread to other parts of the body) 

## Chemo side effects 

Chemo works by attacking cells that are rapidly dividing. This is helpful in killing cancer cells, but can also affect normal cells, leading to some side effects. Side effects^1 of chemo depend on the type of drugs, the amount taken, and the length of time you are treated. 

Common side effects of chemotherapy include: 

 l Hair loss l Mouth sores l Loss of appetite l Diarrhea l Nausea and vomiting Changes in the menstrual cycle, premature menopause, and infertility (inability to become pregnant) 

 l 

Chemo can also affect the blood-forming cells of the bone marrow, lowering the blood cell counts. This can cause: 

 l Increased chance of infections (from low white blood cells) l Easy bruising or bleeding (from low blood platelets) l Fatigue (caused by low red blood cells) 

Most side effects are temporary and stop when the treatment is over, but some can be long-lasting or even permanent. 

**Long-term side effects of chemotherapy** 

**Menstrual changes** : If you have not had your uterus removed as a part of treatment, changes in menstrual periods are a common side effect of chemo. But even if your periods stop while you are getting chemo, you might still be able to get pregnant. Getting pregnant while receiving chemo is not safe, as it might lead to birth defects and interfere with treatment. This is why it’s important to discuss birth control options with 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
your doctor if you are pre-menopausal and sexually active before treatment. Patients who have finished treatment (like chemo) can often go on to have children, but it's important to talk to your doctor about when it is safe to do so. 

Premature menopause (not having any more menstrual periods) and infertility (not being able to become pregnant) may occur and may be permanent. Some chemo drugs are more likely to cause this than others. The older a woman is when she gets chemo, the more likely it is that she will become infertile or go through menopause as a result. If this happens, there is an increased risk of bone loss and osteoporosis. Medicines that can treat or help prevent problems with bone loss are available. 

**Neuropathy:** Some drugs used to treat cervical cancer, including paclitaxel and cisplatin, can damage nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord. This can sometimes lead to symptoms like numbness, pain, burning or tingling sensations, sensitivity to cold or heat, or weakness, mainly in the hands and feet. This is called peripheral neuropathy^2. In most cases it gets better or even goes away once treatment stops, but it might last a long time in some people. 

**Nephrotoxicity:** Cisplatin, the main chemo drug used to treat cervical cancer, can damage the kidneys (also called **nephrotoxicity** ). Many times the damage is preventable and reversible, but sometimes it may be long-lasting. Often, there are no symptoms, but the damage can be seen on bloodwork done routinely while chemo is given. If the kidneys are damaged, the cisplatin is usually stopped and carboplatin may be used instead. 

Other side effects are also possible. Ask your cancer care team about the chemo you will receive and what side effects you can expect. 

## More information about chemotherapy 

For more general information about how chemotherapy is used to treat cancer, see Chemotherapy^3. 

To learn about some of the side effects listed here and how to manage them, see Managing Cancer-related Side Effects^4. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html) 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Targeted Drug Therapy for Cervical 

# Cancer 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/pain/peripheralneuropathy.html 

### 2. 

 3.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/chemotherapy.html 4.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

Liontos M, Kyriazoglou A, Dimitriadis I, Dimopoulos MA, Bamias A. Systemic therapy in cervical cancer: 30 years in review. _Crit Rev Oncol Hematol_. 2019 May;137:9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2019.02.009. Epub 2019 Feb 28. PMID: 31014518. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Cervical Cancer. Version 3.2024. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org on June 8, 2024. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Targeted drug therapy is the use of medicines are directed at proteins on cervical cancer cells that help them grow, spread, or live longer. Targeted drugs work to destroy cancer cells or slow down their growth. They have side effects different from chemotherapy and some are taken as a pill. 

 lAntibody-drug conjugates l More information about targeted therapy 

Some targeted therapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system. Different types of targeted drug therapy can be used to treat cervical cancer. 

## Antibody-drug conjugates 

An antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) is a monoclonal antibody linked to a chemotherapy drug. The antibody acts like a homing signal by attaching to a target protein on cancer cells, so that the chemo can be brought directly to the cancer cell and cause damage. 

**Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan, T-DXd (Enhertu)** 

This ADC connects the anti-HER2 antibody to the chemo drug, deruxtecan. T-DXd can be used by itself to treat late-stage, HER2-positive cervical cancer that has recurred after the first systemic treatment. This drug is given in a vein (IV) typically once every 3 weeks. 

**Common side effects include:** Low blood cell counts, nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, hair loss, decreased appetite, low potassium level, changes in liver function tests, and cough. A less common, but serious side effect is decreased heart muscle strength, a condition called left ventricular dysfunction. 

**Tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak)** 

This ADC has an antibody that targets tissue-factor (TF) protein on cancer cells. It brings the chemo drug, monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE), directly to the cancer cell. Tisotumab vedotin can be used by itself to treat late-stage cervical cancer that has recurred, after initial chemo treatment. This drug is given in a vein (IV) typically once every 3 weeks. 

**Common side effects can include:** Feeling tired, nausea, vomiting, hair loss, 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
bleeding, diarrhea, rash, nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy), abnormal kidney function, or low blood cell counts. Less common but serious side effects can include vision change or loss. Patients should have regular eye exams while on this drug and tell their health care team right away if they have any eye symptoms. 

**RET inhibitors** 

In a small percentage of cervical cancers, the tumor cells have rearrangement in the RET gene that cause them to make an abnormal form of the RET protein. This abnormal protein helps the tumor cells grow. 

**Selpercatinib (Retevmo)** is a RET inhibitor and can be used to treat advanced cervical cancer with the RET rearrangement. These drugs are capsules taken by mouth , typically twice a day. 

**Common side effects can include:** Dry mouth, diarrhea or constipation, high blood pressure, tiredness, swelling in hands and/or feet, skin rash, muscle and joint pain, low blood cell counts or changes in other blood tests. Less common but more serious side effects can include liver damage, lung damage, allergic reactions, changes in heart rhythm, bleeding easily, and problems with wound healing. 

**NTRK inhibitors** 

A very small number of cervical cancers have changes in one of the NTRK genes, called **NTRK gene fusions**. Cells with these gene changes make abnormal TRK proteins, which can lead to abnormal cell growth and cancer. **Larotrectinib (Vitrakyi)** or **entrectinib (Rozlytrek)** are NTRK inhibitors. TRK inhibitors target and disable the proteins made by the NTRK genes. These drugs are taken as pills, once or twice daily. 

**Common side effects can include:** Abnormal liver test results; decreased white blood cell and red blood cells; muscle and joint pain; tiredness; diarrhea or constipation; nausea and vomiting; and stomach pain. Less common but more serious side effects can include mental changes, such as confusion, changes in mood, and changes in sleep; liver damage; changes in heart rhythm and/or function; vision changes; and harm to a fetus. 

## More information about targeted therapy 

To learn more about how targeted drugs are used to treat cancer, see Targeted Cancer Therapy^1. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Immunotherapy for Cervical Cancer 

To learn about some of the side effects listed here and how to manage them, see Managing Cancer-related Side Effects^2. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/targeted-therapy.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/targeted-therapy.html) 2.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html 

**References** 

Coleman RL, Lorusso D, Gennigens C, et al. Efficacy and safety of tisotumab vedotin in previously treated recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer (innovaTV 204/GOG3023/ENGOT-cx6): a multicentre, open-label, single-arm, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2021;22:609-619. 

Meric-Bernstam F, Makker V, Oaknin A, et al. Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab deruxtecan in patients with HER2-expressing solid tumors: DESTINY-PanTumor02 interim results. Presented at the 2023 ASCO Annual Meeting; June 2–6, 2023; Chicago, Illinois. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines®), Cervical Cancer, Version 1.2025 -March 26, 2024. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org/on May 28, 2024. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 

Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help a person’s immune system better recognize and destroy cancer cells. Many types of immunotherapy are being tested in clinical trials, and some are used to treat cervical cancer. 

 lImmune checkpoint inhibitors 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 l Possible side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors l More information about immunotherapy 

## Immune checkpoint inhibitors 

An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking the body's normal cells. To do this, it uses “checkpoint” proteins on immune cells, which act like switches that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system. Drugs that target these checkpoints (called **immune checkpoint inhibitors** ) can be used to treat some cervical cancers. 

**PD-1 inhibitors** 

**Pembrolizumab (Keytruda)** is a drug that targets PD-1, a checkpoint protein on immune system cells called **T cells**. PD-1 normally helps keep T cells from attacking other cells in the body (including some cancer cells). By blocking PD-1, this drug boosts the immune response against cancer cells. This can shrink some tumors or slow their growth. 

Pembrolizumab can be used along with the chemotherapy drugs cisplatin/carboplatin and paclitaxel with or without bevacizumab to treat cervical cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. 

This drug is given as an intravenous (IV) infusion, typically once every 3 or 6 weeks. 

Pembrolizumab can also be used by itself to treat some advanced cervical cancers, typically after other treatments have been tried, if there are no other good treatment options, and if the cancer cells have been tested and found to have any of the following: 

 A high level of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) or a defect in a mismatch repair gene (dMMR) 

 l 

 A high tumor mutational burden (TMB-H) , meaning the cells have many gene mutations 

 l 

 A high amount of the PD-L1 protein on the tumor cells' surface (the cancer cells are PD-L1 positive). 

 l 

**Nivolumab (Optivo)** targets PD-1 and can be used to treat advanced cervical cancers, after other treatments have been tried, if the tumor cells are PD-L1 positive. It is given as an IV infusion, typically once every 2 or 4 weeks. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**Cemiplimab (Libtayo)** also targets PD-1. It can be given to patients with advanced cervical cancer that recurred after initial systemic treatment, regardless of their PD-L1 status. This drug is given as an IV infusion, typically once every 3 weeks. 

## Possible side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors 

Side effects of PD-1 inhibitors can include: 

 lFeeling tired or weak l Fever l Cough l Nausea l Itching l Skin rash l Loss of appetite l Muscle or joint pain l Shortness of breath l Constipation or diarrhea 

Other, more serious side effects occur less often. These can include: 

**Infusion reactions** : Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting this drug. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting this drug. 

**Autoimmune reactions** : This drug works by removing one of the safeguards on the body’s immune system. Sometimes this causes a person's immune system to attack other parts of their body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, skin, or other organs. 

It’s very important to report any new side effects to your health care team right away. If you do have a serious side effect, treatment may need to be delayed or stopped, and you may be given high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system. 

## More information about immunotherapy 

To learn more about how drugs that work on the immune system are used to treat cancer, see Cancer Immunotherapy^1. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Treatment Options for Cervical Cancer, 

To learn about some of the side effects listed here and how to manage them, see Managing Cancer-related Side Effects^2. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/immunotherapy.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/treatment-types/immunotherapy.html) 2.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html 

**References** 

Colombo N, Dubot C, Lorusso D, et al. Pembrolizumab for persistent, recurrent, or metastatic cervical cancer. _NEJM_ 2021;385:1856-1867. 

Marabelle A, Le DT, Ascierto PA, et al. Efficacy of pembrolizumab in patients with noncolorectal high microsatellite instability/mismatch repair-deficient cancer: results from the phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study. _J Clin Oncol_ 2020;38:1-10. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines®), Cervical Cancer, Version 1.2025 -March 26, 2024. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org on May 28, 2024. 

Naumann RW, Hollebecque A, Meyer T, et al. Safety and efficacy of nivolumab monotherapy in recurrent or metastatic cervical, vaginal, or vulvar carcinoma: Results from the phase I/II CheckMate 358 trial. _J Clin Oncol_ 2019;37:2825-2834. 

Tewari KS, Monk BJ, Vergote I et al. Survival with cemiplimab in recurrent cervical cancer. _NEJM_ 2022;386:544-555. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# by Stage 

The stage of a cervical cancer is the most important factor in choosing treatment. But other factors can also affect your treatment options, including the location of the cancer within the cervix, the type of cancer (squamous cell or adenocarcinoma), your age, your overall health, and whether you want to have children. 

 lStage IA1 l Stage IA2 l Stages IB and IIA l Stages IB3 and IIA2 l Stages IIB, III, IVA l Stage IVB l Cervical cancer in pregnancy 

## Stage IA1 

Treatment for this stage depends on whether or not you want to be able to have children (maintain fertility) and whether or not the cancer has grown into blood or lymph vessels (called lymphovascular invasion). 

**Treatment options if you want to maintain fertility** 

A **cone biopsy** is the preferred procedure if you want to have children after the cancer is treated. 

 If the edges of the cone don’t contain cancer cells (called negative margins), the woman can be watched closely without further treatment as long as the cancer doesn’t come back. 

 l 

 If the edges of the cone biopsy have cancer cells (called positive margins), then cancer may have been left behind. This can be treated with a repeat cone biopsy or a radical trachelectomy. 

 l 

 If the cone biopsy shows that the cancer has grown into blood or lymph vessels, it would then be treated the same as stage IA2 disease (see below). 

 l 

**Treatment options if you don’t want to maintain fertility** 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 A simple hysterectomy may be an option if the cancer shows no lymphovascular invasion and the edges of the biopsy have no cancer cells. If the edges of the biopsy have cancer cells present, a repeat cone biopsy or a radical hysterectomy with removal of the pelvic lymph nodes might be an option. 

 l 

 If the cancer has grown into blood or lymph vessels, you might need a radical hysterectomy along with removal of the pelvic lymph nodes. Sometimes, surgery is not done and external beam radiation to the pelvis followed by brachytherapy is used. 

 l 

If none of the lymph nodes are found to have cancer, radiation may still be discussed as an option if the tumor is large, if the tumor has grown into blood or lymph vessels, or if the tumor is invading the surrounding connective tissue (the stroma) that supports organs such as the uterus, bladder, and vagina. 

If the cancer has spread to the tissues next to the uterus (called the **parametria** ) or to any lymph nodes, or if the tissue removed has positive margins, radiation (EBRT) with chemotherapy is usually recommended. The doctor may also advise brachytherapy after the combined chemo and radiation are done. 

## Stage IA2 

Treatment for this stage depends in part on whether or not you want to continue to be able to have children (maintain fertility). 

**Treatment options if you want to maintain fertility** 

 l Cone biopsy with removal of pelvic lymph nodes (pelvic lymph node dissection) l Radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection 

**Treatment options if you don’t want to maintain fertility** 

 l External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) to the pelvis plus brachytherapy l Radical hysterectomy with removal of pelvic lymph nodes 

If none of the lymph nodes have cancer cells, radiation may still be an option if the tumor is large, if the tumor has grown into blood or lymph vessels, or if the tumor is invading the surrounding connective tissue (the stroma) that supports organs such as the uterus, bladder, and vagina. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
If the cancer has spread to the tissues next to the uterus (called the **parametria** ) or to any lymph nodes, or if the tissue removed has positive margins, radiation (EBRT) with chemotherapy is usually recommended. The doctor may also advise brachytherapy after the combined chemo and radiation are done. 

## Stages IB and IIA 

**Stages IB1 and IB2: Treatment options if you want to maintain fertility** 

 Radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection and sometimes removal of the para-aortic lymph nodes 

 l 

**Stage IB1, IB2, and IIA1: Treatment options if you don’t want to maintain fertility** 

 Radical hysterectomy with removal of lymph nodes in the pelvis and sometimes lymph nodes from the para-aortic area. If none of the lymph nodes are found to have cancer, radiation may still be discussed as an option if the tumor is large, if the tumor has grown into blood or lymph vessels, or if the tumor is invading the surrounding connective tissue (the stroma) that supports organs such as the uterus, bladder, and vagina. If the cancer has spread to the tissues next to the uterus (called the parametria ) or to any lymph nodes, or if the tissue removed has positive margins, radiation (EBRT) with chemotherapy is usually recommended. The doctor may also advise brachytherapy after the combined chemo and radiation are done. 

 l 

 Radiation to the pelvis using both brachytherapy and external beam radiation therapy may be an option if a patient is not healthy enough for surgery or decides they do not want surgery. Chemotherapy (chemo) may be given with the radiation (concurrent chemoradiation). 

 l 

## Stages IB3 and IIA2 

**Treatment options** 

 Chemoradiation: The chemo may be cisplatin orcarboplatin, given concurrently with external beam radiation (EBRT). , This may be followed by brachytherapy. 

 l 

 l Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection and possibly para-aortic 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 lymph node sampling: If cancer cells are found in the removed lymph nodes, or in the edges of the tissue removed (positive margins), surgery may be followed by radiation therapy, which is often given with chemo (concurrent chemoradiation). Chemoradiation and brachytherapy followed by a hysterectomy. This is not commonly done, but may be an option for certain patients. 

 l 

## Stages IIB, III, IVA 

**Treatment options** 

Chemoradiation: The chemo may be cisplatin or carboplatin, given concurrently (at the same time) with external beam radiation (EBRT). This may be followed by brachytherapy. 

## Stage IVB 

At this stage, the cancer has spread outside the pelvis to other areas of the body. Stage IVB cervical cancer is not usually considered curable. Treatment options include chemo alone or with pembrolizumab if the tumor is PD-L1 positive. If chemo is given alone, it's usually a combination of cisplatin or carboplatin with paclitaxel and bevacizumab. If chemo is given with pembrolizumab, chemo is usually cisplatin or carboplatin with paclitaxel, with or without bevacizumab. Radiation therapy may be given to help relieve symptoms. For disease that recurs after initial systemic therapy, other chemo drugs, or immunotherapyalone, ortargeted therapy may also be options. 

Clinical trials^1 are testing other combinations of chemo drugs, as well as some other experimental treatments. 

**Recurrent cervical cancer** 

Cancer that comes back after treatment is called **recurrent cancer**. Cancer can come back locally (in or near where it first started, such as the cervix, uterus or nearby the pelvic organs), or it can come back in distant areas (such as the lungs or bone). 

If the cancer has recurred in the center of the pelvis only, extensive surgery (such as pelvic exenteration) may be an option for some patients, and offers the best chance for possibly curing the cancer (although it can have major side effects). Radiation therapy (sometimes along with chemo) might be another option. If not, chemo, immunotherapy, or targeted therapy may be used to slow the growth of the cancer or help relieve 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
symptoms, but they aren’t expected to cure the cancer. 

No matter which type of treatment your doctor recommends, it's important that you understand the goal of treatment (to try to cure the cancer, control its growth, or relieve symptoms), as well as its possible side effects and limitations. For example, sometimes chemo can improve your quality of life, and other times it might diminish it. You might need to discuss this with your doctor. 

New treatments that may benefit patients who have distant recurrence of cervical cancer are being evaluated in clinical trials^2. 

## Cervical cancer in pregnancy 

A small number of cervical cancers are found in pregnant women. Most of these (70%) are stage I cancers. The treatment plan during pregnancy is determined by: 

 lTumor size l If nearby lymph nodes have cancer l How far along the pregnancy is l The specific type of cervical cancer 

If the cancer is at a very early stage, such as stage IA, most doctors believe it is safe to continue the pregnancy to term and have treatment several weeks after birth. Surgery options after birth for early-stage cancers include a hysterectomy, radical trachelectomy, or a cone biopsy. 

If the cancer is stage IB or higher, then you and your doctor must decide whether to continue the pregnancy. If not, treatment would be radical hysterectomy and/or radiation. Sometimes chemotherapy can be given during the pregnancy (in the second or third trimester) to shrink the tumor. 

If you decide to continue the pregnancy, the baby should be delivered by cesarean section (C-section) as soon as it is able to survive outside the womb. More advanced cancers typically need be treated immediately. 

## Hyperlinks 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/making-treatment-decisions/clinicaltrials.html 

### 1. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/making-treatment-decisions/clinicaltrials.html 

### 2. 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

Liontos M, Kyriazoglou A, Dimitriadis I, Dimopoulos MA, Bamias A. Systemic therapy in cervical cancer: 30 years in review. _Crit Rev Oncol Hematol_. 2019 May;137:9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2019.02.009. Epub 2019 Feb 28. PMID: 31014518. 

Moore DH. Cervical cancer. _Obstet Gynecol_. 2006 May;107(5):1152-61. doi: 10.1097/01.AOG.0000215986.48590.79. PMID: 16648423. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Cervical Cancer. Version 3.2024. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org on June 8, 2024. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 

**Written by** 

The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team (https://www.cancer.org/cancer/acs-medical-content-and-news-staff.html) 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as editors and translators with extensive experience in medical writing. 

American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For reprint requests, please see our Content Usage Policy (www.cancer.org/aboutus/policies/content-usage.html). 

 cancer.org | 1.800.227.2345 


