## cancer.org | 1.800.227.2345 

# Cervical Cancer Early Detection, 

# Diagnosis, and Staging 

Know the signs and symptoms of cervical cancer. Find out how cervical cancer is tested for, diagnosed, and staged. 

**Finding Cervical Cancer Early** 

Catching cancer early often allows for more treatment options. Some early cancers may have signs and symptoms that can be noticed, but that is not always the case. 

 lCan Cervical Cancer Be Found Early? The American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Prevention and Early Detection of Cervical Cancer 

 l 

 l Cervical Cancer Prevention and Screening: Financial Issues l Screening Tests for Cervical Cancer 

**Diagnosis and Planning Treatment** 

After a cancer diagnosis, staging provides important information about the extent of cancer in the body, the best treatment plan for the cancer, and the anticipated response to treatment. 

 lSigns and Symptoms of Cervical Cancer l Tests for Cervical Cancer l Cervical Cancer Stages l Survival Rates for Cervical Cancer l Questions to Ask About Cervical Cancer 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Can Cervical Cancer Be Found Early? 

The best way to find cervical cancer early is to have regular screening tests. The tests for cervical cancer screening are the HPV test and the Pap test. These tests can be done alone or at the same time (called a co-test). Regular screening has been shown to prevent cervical cancers and save lives. **_The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get._** 

Early detection greatly improves the chances of successful treatment of pre-cancers and cancer. Being aware of anysigns and symptoms of cervical cancer can also help avoid delays in diagnosis. 

For more information about using the HPV test and the Pap test to find cervical cancer early, see The American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Prevention and Early Detection of Cervical Cancer. 

**References** 

Cheung LC, Egemen D, Chen X, et al. 2019 ASCCP Risk-Based Management Consensus Guidelines: Methods for Risk Estimation, Recommended Management, and Validation. _J Low Genit Tract Dis_. 2020;24(2):90-101. doi:10.1097/LGT.0000000000000528. 

Cuzick J, Myers O, Hunt WC, et al. A population-based evaluation of cervical screening in the United States: 2008-2011. _Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev_. 2014;23:765-73. 

Egemen D, Cheung LC, Chen X, et al. Risk Estimates Supporting the 2019 ASCCP Risk-Based Management Consensus Guidelines. _J Low Genit Tract Dis_. 2020;24(2):132-143. doi:10.1097/LGT.0000000000000529. 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Fontham, ETH, Wolf, AMD, Church, TR, et al. Cervical Cancer Screening for Individuals 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# The American Cancer Society 

# Guidelines for the Prevention and Early 

# Detection of Cervical Cancer 

at Average Risk: 2020 Guideline Update from the American Cancer Society. CA Cancer J Clin. 2020. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21628. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

National Cancer Institute. Physician Data Query (PDQ). Cervical Cancer Prevention – Patient Version. 2019. https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/patient/cervicalprevention-pdq. Updated March 8, 2019. Accessed on November 1, 2019. 

Perkins RB, Guido RS, Castle PE, et al. 2019 ASCCP Risk-Based Management Consensus Guidelines for Abnormal Cervical Cancer Screening Tests and Cancer Precursors. _J Low Genit Tract Dis_. 2020;24(2):102-131. doi:10.1097/LGT.0000000000000525. 

Sawaya GF, Smith-McCune K, Kuppermann M. Cervical Cancer Screening: More Choices in 2019. _JAMA_. 2019;321(20):2018–2019. doi:10.1001/jama.2019.4595 

Schiffman M, Castle PE, Jeronimo J, Rodriguez AC, Wacholder S. Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer. _Lancet._ 2007;370:890-907. 

 Last Revised: July 30, 2020 

 lImportance of being screened for cervical cancer 

The American Cancer Society recommends that individuals with a cervix follow these guidelines to help find cervical cancer early. Following these guidelines can also find pre-cancers, which can be treated to keep cervical cancer from starting. These guidelines do not apply to people who have been diagnosed with cervical cancer or cervical pre-cancer. These women should have follow-up testing and cervical cancer 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
screening as recommended by their health care team. 

 lCervical cancer testing (screening) should begin at age 25. Those aged 25 to 65 should have a primary HPV test* every 5 years. If primary HPV testing is not available, screening may be done with either a co-test that combines an HPV test with a Papanicolaou (Pap) test every 5 years or a Pap test alone every 3 years. (*A primary HPV test is an HPV test that is done by itself for screening. The US Food and Drug Administration has approved certain tests to be primary HPV tests.) The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get. 

 l 

 Those over age 65 who have had regular screening in the past 10 years with normal results and no history of CIN2 or more serious diagnosis within the past 25 years should stop cervical cancer screening. Once stopped, it should not be started again. 

 l 

 People who have had a total hysterectomy (removal of the uterus and cervix) should stop screening (such as Pap tests and HPV tests), unless the hysterectomy was done as a treatment for cervical cancer or serious pre-cancer. People who have had a hysterectomy without removal of the cervix (called a supra-cervical hysterectomy ) should continue cervical cancer screening according to the guidelines above. 

 l 

 People who have been vaccinated against HPV should still follow these guidelines for their age groups. 

 l 

Some people believe that they can stop cervical cancer screening once they have stopped having children. This is not true. They should continue to follow American Cancer Society guidelines. 

**Considerations for Other Patient Populations** 

If you have a history of a serious pre-cancer, you should continue to have testing for at least 25 years after that condition was found, even if the testing goes past age 65. 

Those who are at high risk of cervical cancer because of a suppressed immune system (for example from HIV infection, organ transplant, or long-term steroid use) or because they were exposed to DES in utero may need to be screened more often. They should 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
follow the recommendations of their health care team. 

## Importance of being screened for cervical cancer 

Cervical cancer was once one of the most common causes of cancer death for American women. The cervical cancer death rate dropped significantly with the increased use of the Pap test for screening. But the death rate has not changed much over the last 10 years. 

In recent years, the HPV test has been approved as another screening test for cervical cancer. The HPV test looks for infection by high-risk types of HPV that are more likely to cause pre-cancers and cancers of the cervix. The HPV test can be used alone (primary HPV test) or at the same time as the Pap test (called a co-test). 

Screening tests offer the best chance to have cervical cancer found early when treatment can be most successful. Screening can also actually prevent most cervical cancers by finding abnormal cervical cell changes (pre-cancers) so that they can be treated before they have a chance to turn into a cervical cancer. 

Despite the benefits of cervical cancer screening, not all American women get screened. Most cervical cancers are found in women who have never had a Pap test or who have not had one recently. Women without health insurance and women who have recently immigrated are less likely to have cervical cancer screening. 

**References** 

American Cancer Society. _Cancer Facts & Figures 2019_. Atlanta, Ga: American Cancer Society; 2019. 

American Cancer Society. _Cancer Prevention & Early Detection Facts & Figures 20192020_. Atlanta, Ga: American Cancer Society; 2019. 

Fontham, ETH, Wolf, AMD, Church, TR, et al. Cervical Cancer Screening for Individuals at Average Risk: 2020 Guideline Update from the American Cancer Society. CA Cancer J Clin. 2020. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21628. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Cervical Cancer Prevention and 

# Screening: Financial Issues 

 Last Revised: April 22, 2021 

 lFederal law l Self-insured plans l Medicaid l Medicare l National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program l HPV vaccine costs 

Financial issues can play an important role in whether or not women are screened for cervical cancer. Women with lower incomes and those without health insurance are less likely to be screened. 

Many states ensure that private insurance companies, Medicaid, and public employee health plans pay for regular screening tests. 

Other programs are also available to help provide financial assistance for women with lower incomes and those without insurance. 

It's important to know that insurance coverage may or may not conform to American Cancer Society cancer screening guidelines. 

## Federal law 

Coverage of cervical cancer screening tests is mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA)^1 , but that doesn’t apply to health plans that were in place before it was passed. You can find out the date your insurance plan started by contacting your health insurance plan administrator. If your plan started on or after September 23, 2010, it’s required to cover the recommended cervical cancer screening tests. If your plan started before September 23, 2010, it may still have coverage requirements mandated by your state, but each state is different. 

## Self-insured plans 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Self-insured (or self-funded) plans pay employee health care costs from their own funds, even though they usually contract with another company to track and pay claims. You can find out if your health plan is self-insured by contacting your insurance administrator at work or reading your Summary of Plan Benefits. 

These plans are governed by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), so most are required to cover cervical cancer screening. 

Women who have self-insured based health insurance should check with their health plans to see what cervical cancer screening services are offered. 

## Medicaid 

By statute or agency policy, Medicaid or public assistance programs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia cover screening for cervical cancer either routinely or on a doctor’s recommendation. Please check with your state Medicaid office to learn more about what services are provided for cervical cancer screening. 

## Medicare 

Medicare Part B covers tests used for cervical cancer screening, including a Pap test and pelvic exam every 2 years. For people at high risk for cervical or vaginal cancer, or if a woman is of childbearing age and has had an abnormal Pap test in the previous 3 years, Medicare covers screening every year. 

Part B also covers human papillomavirus (HPV) tests once every 5 years for people ages 30 to 65. 

This screening is provided without co-pay, co-insurance, or deductible as long as you go to a doctor that accepts Medicare. 

## National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program 

All states are making cervical cancer screening more available to women through the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP). This program provides breast and cervical cancer screening to women without health insurance for free or at very little cost. The NBCCEDP attempts to reach as many women in underserved communities as possible, including older women, women without health insurance and women who are members of racial and ethnic minorities. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Though the program is administered within each state, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides support to each state program. 

Each state’s Department of Health will have information on how to contact the nearest program participant. For more information on this program, you can also contact the CDC at 1-800-CDC-INFO (1-800-232-4636) or on the web at [http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/nbccedp](http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/nbccedp)^2. 

If cervical cancer is detected during screening in this program, most states can now extend Medicaid benefits to these women to cover the costs of treatment. 

To learn more about this program, see National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program^3. 

## HPV vaccine costs 

Insurance plans cover the cost of the HPV vaccine in accordance with the federal Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommendations. The HPV vaccine is also included in the federal Vaccine for Children (VFC) entitlement program, which covers vaccine costs for children and teens who don’t have insurance or who are underinsured. 

## Hyperlinks 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/financial-insurance-matters/health-insurance-laws/thehealth-care-law.html 

### 1. 

 2.www.cdc.gov/cancer/nbccedp/ http://www.cancer.org/cancer/financial-insurance-matters/understanding-healthinsurance/government-funded-programs/nbccedp.html 

### 3. 

**References** 

CDC.gov. About VFC The VFC Program: At a Glance. Accessed at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/about/index.html on July 21, 2020. 

HealthCare.gov. Preventive care benefits for women. Accessed at https://www.healthcare.gov/preventive-care-women/ on July 21, 2020. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Screening Tests for Cervical Cancer 

Medicare.gov. Cervical & vaginal cancer screenings. Accessed at https://www.medicare.gov/coverage/cervical-vaginal-cancer-screenings on July 21, 2020. 

 Last Revised: July 30, 2020 

The best way to find cervical cancer early is to have regular screening tests. Regular screening has been shown to prevent cervical cancers and save lives. Early detection greatly improves the chances of successful treatment and can prevent any early cervical cell changes from becoming cancer. Being alert to any signs and symptoms of cervical cancer can also help avoid unnecessary delays in diagnosis. 

The tests for cervical cancer screening are the **HPV test** and the **Pap test.** These tests can be done alone or at the same time (called a **co-test** ) and are done during a pelvic exam. 

**_The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get._** 

The HPV Test 

Doctors can now test for the HPV (high-risk or carcinogenic types) that are most likely to cause cervical cancer by looking for pieces of their DNA in cervical cells. The test can be done by itself or at the same time as the Pap test, with the same swab or a second swab. 

The Pap (Papanicolaou) Test 

The Pap test is a procedure used to collect cells from the cervix so that they can be looked at in the lab to find cancer and pre-cancer. 

When Cervical Screening Test Results are Abnormal 

The first step in finding cervical cancer is often an abnormal HPV or Pap test result. This will lead to further tests, which can diagnose cervical cancer. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# The HPV Test 

 Last Revised: January 13, 2023 

The most important risk factor for developing cervical cancer is infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). Doctors can test for the high-risk HPV types that are most likely to cause cervical cancer by looking for pieces of their DNA in cervical cells. The test can be done by itself (primary HPV test) or at the same time as a Pap test(called a co-test). You won’t notice a difference in your exam if you have both tests done. 

The HPV test is most often used in 2 situations: 

 The ACS recommends the primary HPV test* as the preferred test for cervical cancer screening for people 25-65 years of age. (*A primary HPV test is an HPV test that is done by itself for screening. The US Food and Drug Administration has approved certain tests to be primary HPV tests.) 

 l 

 Some HPV tests are approved only as part of a co-test , when the HPV test and the Pap test are done at the same time to screen for cervical cancer. Because a primary HPV test may not be an option everywhere, a co-test every 5 years or a Pap test every 3 years are still good options. 

 l 

_All the screening tests (primary HPV test, co-test, and Pap test) are good at finding cancer and pre-cancer._ The primary HPV test is better at preventing cervical cancers than a Pap test done alone and does not add more unnecessary tests, which can happen with a co-test. **_The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get._** 

The result of the HPV test, along with your past test results, determines your risk of developing cervical cancer. If the test is positive, this could mean more follow-up visits, more tests to look for a pre-cancer or cancer, and sometimes a procedure to treat any pre-cancers that might be found. 

Because there are many different follow-up or treatment options depending on your specific risk of developing cervical cancer, it is best to talk to your healthcare provider about your screening results in more detail, to fully understand your risk of cervical cancer and what follow-up plan is best for you. 

For more information, see the American Cancer Society document HPV and HPV 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# The Pap (Papanicolaou) Test 

Testing^1. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/risk-prevention/hpv/hpv-and-hpv-testing.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/risk-prevention/hpv/hpv-and-hpv-testing.html) 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Fontham, ETH, Wolf, AMD, Church, TR, et al. Cervical Cancer Screening for Individuals at Average Risk: 2020 Guideline Update from the American Cancer Society. _CA Cancer J Clin_. 2020. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21628. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

National Cancer Institute. Understanding Cervical Changes: Next Steps After an Abnormal Screening Test. 2019. https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/understandingcervical-changes#ui-id-2. Updated October 8, 2019. Accessed on November 1, 2019. 

 Last Revised: July 30, 2020 

 lWhat does a Pap smear test for? 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 l How is a Pap test done? l How Pap test results are reported 

A Pap test is sometimes called a Pap smear. It can be done along with a HPV test during a pelvic exam as part of cervical cancer screeningfor people with no symptoms. Or, it can be done as a follow-up test for an abnormal (positive) HPV test or if someone has symptoms that are suspicious for cervical cancer. 

## What does a Pap smear test for? 

A Pap test is a procedure used to collect cells from the cervix (lower part of the uterus) so they can be looked at closely in a lab under a microscope. It tests for changes in cells that might be pre-cancers or cancer. 

## How is a Pap test done? 

The health care professional first places a speculum inside the vagina. The speculum is a metal or plastic instrument that keeps the vagina open so that the cervix can be seen clearly. Next, using a small spatula or brush, a sample of cells and mucus is lightly scraped from the exocervix (see illustration in What is Cervical Cancer?^1 ). A small brush or a cotton-tipped swab is then inserted into the opening of the cervix to take a sample from the endocervix. If your cervix has been removed (because you had a trachelectomy or hysterectomy) as a part of the treatment for a cervical cancer or precancer, the cells from the upper part of the vagina (known as the **vaginal cuff** ) will be sampled. The samples are then looked at in the lab. 

Although the Pap test has been more successful than any other screening test in preventing a cancer, it’s not perfect. One of the limitations of the Pap test is that the results need to be examined by the human eye, so an accurate analysis of the hundreds of thousands of cells in each sample is not always possible. Engineers, scientists, and doctors are working together to improve this test. Because some abnormalities may be missed (even when samples are looked at in the best labs), it’s best to have this test regularly as recommended by the American Cancer Society guidelines. 

**Making your Pap tests more accurate** 

You can do several things to make your Pap test as accurate as possible. It's important to ask your doctor or nurse how you need to prepare for the Pap test, including: 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Trying not to schedule an appointment for a time during your menstrual period. The best time is at least 5 days after your period stops. 

 l 

 Not using tampons, birth-control foams or jellies, other vaginal creams, moisturizers, or lubricants, or vaginal medicines for up to 7 days before the Pap test. 

 l 

 l Not using a douche for 2 to 3 days before the Pap test. l Not having vaginal sex for 2 days before the Pap test. 

**Pelvic exam vs. a Pap test** 

Many people confuse pelvic exams with Pap tests. The pelvic exam is part of a woman’s routine health care. During a pelvic exam, the doctor looks at and feels the reproductive organs, including the uterus and the ovaries and may do tests for sexually transmitted disease. Pelvic exams may help find other types of cancers and reproductive problems. A Pap test can be done during a pelvic exam , but sometimes a pelvic exam is done without a Pap test. A Pap test is needed to find early cervical cancer or pre-cancers so ask your doctor if you had a Pap test with your pelvic exam. 

## How Pap test results are reported 

The most widely used system for describing Pap test results is the Bethesda System (TBS). There are 3 main categories, some of which have sub-categories: 

 lNegative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy l Epithelial cell abnormalities l Other malignant neoplasms. 

You may need further testing if your Pap test showed any of the abnormalities below. See Work-up of Abnormal Pap Test Results. 

**Negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy** 

This category means that no signs of cancer, pre-cancer, or other significant abnormalities were found. There may be findings that are unrelated to cervical cancer, such as signs of infection with yeast, herpes, or _Trichomonas vaginalis_ (a type of sexually transmitted disease), for example. Specimens from some women may also show “reactive cellular changes”, which is the way cervical cells appear when infection or other inflammation is around. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**Epithelial cell abnormalities** 

This means that the cells lining the cervix or vagina show changes that might be cancer or a pre-cancer. This category is divided into several groups for squamous cells and glandular cells. 

**Squamous cell abnormalities** 

**Atypical squamous cells (ASCs) This category includes two types of abnormalities:** 

 Atypical squamous cells of uncertain significance (ASC-US) is used to describe when there are cells that look abnormal, but it is not possible to tell if this is caused by infection, irritation, or a pre-cancer. Most of the time, cells labeled ASC-US are not pre-cancer, but more testing, like an HPV test, is needed to be sure. 

 l 

 Atypical squamous cells where high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) can’t be excluded (ASC-H)is used to describe when the cells look abnormal but are more concerning for a possible pre-cancer that needs more testing and may need treatment. 

 l 

**Squamous intraepithelial lesions (SILs) These abnormalities are divided into two categories:** 

 In low-grade SIL (LSIL) the cells look mildly abnormal. This might also be called mild dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 1 (CIN1). 

 l 

 In high-grade SIL (HSIL) the cells look severely abnormal and are less likely than the cells in LSIL to go away without treatment. They are also more likely to eventually develop into cancer if they are not treated. This might also be called moderate to severe dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 2 or 3 (CIN2 and/or CIN3). 

 l 

Further tests are needed if SIL is seen on a Pap test. If treatment is needed, it can cure most SILs and prevent invasive cancer from forming. 

**Squamous cell carcinoma:** This result means that the woman is likely to have an invasive cancer. Further testing will be done to be sure of the diagnosis before treatment can be planned. 

**Glandular cell abnormalities** 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**Atypical glandular cells:** When the glandular cells do not look normal, but they have concerning features that could be cancerous, the term used is atypical glandular cells (AGC). In this case, the patient should have more testing done. 

**Adenocarcinoma:** Cancers of the glandular cells are called adenocarcinomas. In some cases, the doctor examining the cells can tell whether the adenocarcinoma started in the endocervix, in the uterus (endometrium), or elsewhere in the body. 

**_Other malignant neoplasms_** 

This category is for other types of cancer that hardly ever affect the cervix, such as malignant melanoma, sarcomas, and lymphoma. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/about/what-is-cervical-cancer.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/about/what-is-cervical-cancer.html) 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

National Cancer Institute. Physician Data Query (PDQ). Cervical Cancer Treatment – Health Professional Version. 2019. https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/hp/cervicaltreatment-pdq. Updated February 6, 2019. Accessed on October 30, 2019. 

National Cancer Institute. Understanding Cervical Changes: Next Steps After an Abnormal Screening Test. 2019. https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/understandingcervical-changes#ui-id-2. Updated October 8, 2019. Accessed on November 1, 2019. 

 Last Revised: February 27, 2024 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# When Cervical Screening Test Results 

# are Abnormal 

 l What other tests will I need? Tests for people with symptoms of cervical cancer or abnormal screening test results 

 l 

Finding cervical cancer often starts with an abnormal HPV (human papillomavirus) or Pap test result. This will lead to further tests, which can diagnose cervical cancer or precancer. 

Cervical cancer may also be suspected if you have symptoms like abnormal vaginal bleeding or pain during sex. Your primary doctor or gynecologist often can do the tests needed to diagnose pre-cancers and cancers and may also be able to treat a precancer. 

If there is a diagnosis of invasive cancer, your doctor should refer you to a gynecologic oncologist, a doctor who specializes in cancers of women's reproductive systems. 

## What other tests will I need? 

Your current screening test results along with your past test results, determine your risk of developing cervical cancer. Your doctor will use them to figure out your next test or treatment. It could be a follow-up screening test in a year, a colposcopy, or one of the other procedures discussed below to treat any pre-cancers that might be found. 

Because there are many different follow-up or treatment options depending on your specific risk of developing cervical cancer, it is best to talk to your healthcare provider about your screening results in more detail, to fully understand your risk of cervical cancer and what follow-up plan is best for you. 

The Pap test and HPV test are screening tests, not diagnostic tests. They cannot tell for certain if you have cervical cancer. An abnormal Pap test or HPV test result may mean more testing is needed to see if a cancer or a pre-cancer is present. The tests that are used include colposcopy (with biopsy), endocervical scraping and cone biopsies. 

## Tests for people with symptoms of cervical cancer or abnormal 

## screening test results 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**Medical history and physical exam** 

First, the doctor will ask you about your personal and family medical history. This includes information related to risk factors and symptoms of cervical cancer. A complete physical exam will help evaluate your general state of health. You will have a pelvic exam and maybe a Pap test if one has not already been done. In addition, your lymph nodes will be felt to see if the cancer has spread (metastasis). 

**Colposcopy** 

If you have certain symptoms that could mean cancer, if your Pap test shows abnormal cells, or if your HPV test is positive, you will most likely need to have a test called **colposcopy**. You will lie on the exam table as you do with a pelvic exam. A speculum will be placed in the vagina to help the doctor see the cervix more easily with a colposcope. The colposcope is an instrument that stays outside the body and has magnifying lenses. It lets the doctor see the surface of the cervix up close and clearly. Colposcopy itself usually causes no more discomfort than any other speculum exam. It can be done safely even if you are pregnant. Like the Pap test, it is better not to have it during your menstrual period. 

At the time of the procedure, the doctor will apply a weak solution of acetic acid (similar to vinegar) to your cervix to make any abnormal areas easier to see. If an abnormal area is seen, a small piece of tissue will be removed (biopsy) and sent to a lab to be looked at carefully. A biopsy is the best way to tell for certain if an abnormal area is a pre-cancer, a true cancer, or neither. 

**Cervical biopsies** 

Several types of biopsies can be used to diagnose cervical pre-cancers and cancers. After these procedures, patients may feel mild cramping or pain and may also have some light bleeding. 

**_Colposcopic biopsy_** 

For this type of biopsy, the cervix is examined with a colposcope. Using biopsy forceps, a small section of the abnormal area is removed. 

Endocervical curettage (endocervical scraping) 

If colposcopy does not show any abnormal areas or if the transformation zone (the area at risk for HPV infection and pre-cancer) cannot be seen with the colposcope, another 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
method must be used to check that area for cancer. 

A narrow instrument (either a _curette or brush_ ) is inserted into the endocervical canal (the part of the cervix closest to the uterus). The curette or brush is used to scrape the inside of the canal to remove some of the tissue, which is then sent to the lab to be checked. 

**_Cone biopsy_** 

In this procedure, also known as **conization** , the doctor removes a cone-shaped piece of tissue from the cervix. The tissue removed in the cone includes the transformation zone where cervical pre-cancers and cancers are most likely to start. A cone biopsy is not only used to diagnose pre-cancers and cancers. It can also be used as a treatment since it can sometimes completely remove pre-cancers and some very early cancers. 

Two common types of cone biopsies are: 

 Loop electrosurgical procedure (LEEP or LLETZ): In this method, the tissue is removed with a thin wire loop that is heated by electricity and acts as a small knife. For this procedure, a local anesthetic is used, and it can be done in your doctor's office. 

 l 

 Cold knife cone biopsy: This method uses a surgical scalpel or a laser instead of a heated wire to remove tissue. You will receive anesthesia during the operation (either a general anesthesia, where you are asleep, or a spinal or epidural anesthesia, where an injection into the area around the spinal cord makes you numb below the waist) and it is done in a hospital. 

 l 

Possible complications of cone biopsies include bleeding, infection and narrowing of the cervix. 

Having any type of cone biopsy will not prevent most women from getting pregnant, but if a large amount of tissue has been removed, women may have a higher risk of giving birth prematurely. 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Signs and Symptoms of Cervical Cancer 

Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Fontham, ETH, Wolf, AMD, Church, TR, et al. Cervical Cancer Screening for Individuals at Average Risk: 2020 Guideline Update from the American Cancer Society. CA Cancer J Clin. 2020. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21628. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Cervical Cancer. Version 4.2019. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cervical.pdf on October 31, 2019. 

Perkins RB, Guido RS, Castle PE, et al. 2019 ASCCP Risk-Based Management Consensus Guidelines for Abnormal Cervical Cancer Screening Tests and Cancer Precursors. _J Low Genit Tract Dis_. 2020;24(2):102-131. doi:10.1097/LGT.0000000000000525. 

 Last Revised: July 30, 2020 

Women with early cervical cancers and pre-cancers usually have no symptoms. Symptoms often do not begin until the cancer becomes larger and grows into nearby tissue. When this happens, the most common cervical cancer symptoms are: 

 Abnormal vaginal bleeding, such as bleeding after vaginal sex, bleeding after menopause, bleeding and spotting between periods, or having (menstrual) periods that are longer or heavier than usual. Bleeding after douching may also occur. 

 l 

 An unusual discharge from the vagina the discharge may contain some blood and may occur between your periods or after menopause. 

 l 

 l Pain during sex l Pain in the pelvic region 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Signs and symptoms of cervical cancer seen with more advanced disease can include: 

 lSwelling of the legs l Problems urinating or having a bowel movement l Blood in the urine 

These signs and symptoms can also be caused by conditions other than cervical cancer. Still, if you have any of these cervical cancersymptoms, see a health care professional right away. Ignoring symptoms may allow the cancer to grow to a more advanced stage and lower your chance for successful treatment. 

For the best chances for treatment to be successful, don't wait for symptoms and signs of cervical cancer to appear. Have regular screening tests for cervical cancer. 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020. 

National Cancer Institute. Physician Data Query (PDQ). Cervical Cancer Treatment – Health Professional Version. 2019. https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/hp/cervicaltreatment-pdq. Updated February 6, 2019. Accessed on October 28, 2019. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Cervical Cancer. Version 4.2019. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cervical.pdf on October 28, 2019. 

 Last Revised: October 2, 2024 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Tests for Cervical Cancer 

Finding cervical cancer often starts with an abnormal HPV (human papillomavirus) or Pap test result. This will lead to further tests which can diagnose cervical cancer or precancer. The Pap test and HPV test are screening tests, not diagnostic tests. They cannot tell for certain if you have cervical cancer. An abnormal Pap test or HPV test result may mean more testing is needed to see if a cancer or a pre-cancer is present. 

 lUnderstanding abnormal cervical screening test results Tests for people with symptoms of cervical cancer or abnormal cervical screening test results 

 l 

 l Other tests when cervical cancer is diagnosed 

Cervical cancer may also be suspected if you have symptoms like abnormal vaginal bleeding or pain during sex. Your primary doctor or gynecologist often can do the tests needed to diagnose pre-cancers and cancers. If you are diagnosed with invasive cancer, your doctor will probably refer you to a gynecologic oncologist, a doctor who specializes in cancers of women's reproductive systems. 

## Understanding abnormal cervical screening test results 

Your current screening test results along with your past test results, determine your risk of developing cervical cancer. Your doctor will use them to figure out your next test or treatment. It could be a follow-up screening test in a year, a colposcopy, or one of the other procedures discussed below to treat any pre-cancers that might be found. 

Because there are many different follow-up or treatment options depending on your specific risk of developing cervical cancer, it is best to talk to your health care provider about your screening results in more detail, to fully understand your cervical cancer risk and the best follow-up plan for you. 

## Tests for people with symptoms of cervical cancer or abnormal 

## cervical screening test results 

**Medical history and physical exam** 

First, the doctor will ask you about your personal and family medical history. This includes information related to risk factors and symptoms of cervical cancer. A complete physical exam will help evaluate your general state of health. You will have a pelvic 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
exam and maybe a Pap test if one has not already been done. In addition, your lymph nodes will be felt to see if the cancer has spread (metastasis). 

**Colposcopy** 

If you have certain symptoms that could mean cancer, if your Pap test result shows abnormal cells, or if your HPV test is positive, you will most likely need to have a procedure called a **colposcopy**. You will lie on the exam table as you do with a pelvic exam. The doctor will put a speculum in the vagina to help keep it open while examining the cervix with a colposcope. The colposcope is an instrument that stays outside the body and has magnifying lenses. It lets the doctor clearly see the surface of the cervix up close. Colposcopy itself is usually no more uncomfortable than any other speculum exam. It can be done safely even if you are pregnant. Like the Pap test, it is better not to do it during your menstrual period. 

The doctor will put a weak solution of acetic acid (similar to vinegar) on your cervix to make any abnormal areas easier to see. If an abnormal area is seen, a small piece of tissue will be removed (biopsy) and sent to a lab to be looked at carefully. A biopsy is the best way to tell for certain if an abnormal area is a pre-cancer, an invasivecancer, or neither. 

**Types of cervical biopsies** 

Several types of biopsies can be used to diagnose cervical pre-cancers and cancers. If the biopsy can completely remove all of the abnormal tissue, it might be the only treatment needed. 

**_Colposcopic biopsy_** 

For this type of biopsy, the cervix is examined first with a colposcope to find the abnormal areas. Using a biopsy forceps, a small (about 1/8-inch) section of the abnormal area on the surface of the cervix is removed. The biopsy procedure may cause mild cramping, brief pain, and some slight bleeding afterward. 

**_Endocervical curettage (endocervical scraping)_** 

If colposcopy does not show any abnormal areas or if the transformation zone (the area at risk for HPV infection and pre-cancer) cannot be seen with the colposcope, another method must be used to check that area for cancer. 

A narrow instrument (either a **curette** or a **brush** ) is inserted into the endocervical canal 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
(the part of the cervix closest to the uterus). The curette or brush is used to scrape the inside of the canal to remove some of the tissue, which is then sent to the lab to be checked. During or after this procedure, patients may feel a cramping pain, and they may also have some light bleeding. 

**_Cone biopsy_** 

In this procedure, also known as **conization** , the doctor removes a cone-shaped piece of tissue from the cervix. The base of the cone is formed by the exocervix (outer part of the cervix), and the point or apex of the cone is from the endocervical canal. The tissue removed in the cone includes the transformation zone (the border between the exocervix and endocervix, where cervical pre-cancers and cancers are most likely to start). A cone biopsy can also be used as a treatment to completely remove many precancers and some very early cancers. 

The methods commonly used for cone biopsies are the loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP), also called the large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ), and the cold knife cone biopsy. 

 Loop electrosurgical procedure (LEEP, LLETZ): In this method, the tissue is removed with a thin wire loop that is heated by electricity and acts as a small knife. A local anesthetic is used for this procedure, and it can be done in your doctor's office. 

 l 

 Cold knife cone biopsy: This is done in a hospital. A surgical scalpel or a laser is used to remove the tissue instead of a heated wire. You will receive anesthesia during the operation (either a general anesthesia, where you are asleep, or a spinal or epidural anesthesia, where an injection into the area around the spinal cord makes you numb below the waist). 

 l 

Possible complications of cone biopsies include bleeding, infection and narrowing of the cervix. 

Having had any type of cone biopsy will not prevent most women from getting pregnant, but if a large amount of tissue has been removed, women may have a higher risk of giving birth prematurely. 

## Other tests when cervical cancer is diagnosed 

If a biopsy shows that cancer cells are present, your doctor may order certain tests to see if and how far the cancer has spread. Many of the tests described below are not 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
necessary for every patient. Decisions about using these tests are based on the results of the physical exam and biopsy. 

**Cystoscopy, proctoscopy, and examination under anesthesia** 

These are most often done when the tumors are large. They are not necessary if the cancer is caught early. 

In a cystoscopy, a slender tube with a lens and a light is placed into the bladder through the urethra. This lets the doctor check your bladder and urethra to see if cancer is growing into these areas. Biopsy samples can be removed during cystoscopy for testing in the lab. Cystoscopy can be done under a local anesthetic, but some patients may need general anesthesia. Your doctor will let you know what to expect before and after the procedure. 

Proctoscopy is a visual inspection of the rectum through a lighted tube to look for spread of cervical cancer into your rectum. 

Your doctor may also do a pelvic exam while you are under anesthesia to find out if the cancer has spread beyond the cervix. 

**Imaging studies** 

If your doctor finds that you have cervical cancer, certain imaging studies^1 may be done. These tests can show if and where the cancer has spread, which will help you and your doctor decide on a treatment plan. 

 l Chest x-ray: Your chest may be x-rayed to see if cancer has spread to your lungs. Computed tomography (CT): CT scans are usually done if the tumor is larger or if there is concern about cancer spread. For more information, see CT Scan for Cancer^2. 

 l 

 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): MRI scans look at the soft tissue parts of the body sometimes better than other imaging tests, like a CT scan. Your doctor will decide which imaging test is best to use in your situation. For more information, see MRI for Cancer^3. 

 l 

 Positron emission tomography/ computed tomography (PET/CT) scan: For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG ) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells. Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both at the same time. This lets the 

 l 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with a more detailed picture on the CT scan. This is the type of PET scan most often used in patients with cervical cancer. This test can help see if the cancer has spread to lymph nodes. PET scans can also be useful if your doctor thinks the cancer has spread but doesn’t know where. Intravenous urography: Intravenous urography (also known as intravenous pyelogram , or IVP ) is an x-ray of the urinary system taken after a special dye is injected into a vein. This test can find abnormal areas in the urinary tract, caused by the spread of cervical cancer. The most common finding is that the cancer has blocked the ureters (tubes that connect the kidneys to the bladder). IVP is rarely used for patients with cervical cancer because CT and MRI are also good at finding abnormal areas in the urinary tract, as well as others not seen with an IVP. 

 l 

## Hyperlinks 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/diagnosis-staging/tests/imaging-tests/imaging-radiologytests-for-cancer.html 

### 1. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/diagnosis-staging/tests/imaging-tests/ct-scan-forcancer.html 

### 2. 

 3.www.cancer.org/cancer/diagnosis-staging/tests/imaging-tests/mri-for-cancer.html 

**References** 

Eifel P, Klopp AH, Berek JS, and Konstantinopoulos A. Chapter 74: Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds. _DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology_. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019. 

Fontham, ETH, Wolf, AMD, Church, TR, et al. Cervical Cancer Screening for Individuals at Average Risk: 2020 Guideline Update from the American Cancer Society. _CA Cancer J Clin._ 2020. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21628. 

Jhungran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, Duska LR, Goodman A, Lee S, et al. Chapter 84: Cancers of the Cervix, Vulva, and Vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds. _Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology_. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Cervical Cancer Stages 

Elsevier; 2020. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Cervical Cancer. Version 3.2024. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org/ on June 8, 2024. 

 Last Revised: June 28, 2024 

After someone is diagnosed with cervical cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called **staging**. The stage of a cancer describes the extent of the cancer in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it^1. **The stage is one of the most important factors in deciding how to treat the cancer and determining how successful treatment might be.** 

To determine the cancer’s stage after a cervical cancer diagnosis, doctors try to answer these questions: 

 lHow far has the cancer grown into the cervix? l Has the cancer reached nearby structures? l Has the cancer spread to the nearby lymph nodes or to distant organs? 

Information from exams and tests is used to determine the size of the tumor, how deeply the tumor has invaded tissues in and around the cervix, and its spread to distant places (metastasis). For more information see Cancer Staging^2_._ 

The **FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) staging system** is used most often for cancers of the female reproductive organs, including cervical cancer. For cervical cancer, the **clinical stage** is used and is based on the results of the doctor's physical exam, biopsies, imaging tests, and a few other tests that are done in some cases, such as cystoscopy and proctoscopy. It is not based on what is found during surgery. If surgery is done, a **pathologic stage** can be determined from the findings at surgery, but it does not change your clinical stage. Your treatment plan is 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
based on the clinical stage. 

Cervical cancer stage ranges from stages I (1) through IV (4). 

As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means a more advanced cancer. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way. 

Cervical cancer staging can be complex. If you have any questions about your stage, please ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand. (An explanation of the FIGO system is in the stage table below.) 

 FIGO Stage Stage description 

### I 

 The cancer cells have grown from the surface of the cervix into deeper tissues of the cervix. 

 Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 Cancer has not spread to distant sites. 

### IA 

 There is a very small amount of cancer, and it can be seen only under a microscope. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IA1 

 The area of cancer can only be seen with a microscope and is less than 3 mm (about 1/8-inch) deep. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IA2 

 The area of cancer can only be seen with a microscope and is between 3 mm and 5 mm (about 1/5-inch) deep. 

 It not has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
### IB 

 This includes stage I cancer that has spread deeper than 5 mm (about 1/5 inch) but is still limited to the cervix. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IB1 

 The cancer is deeper than 5 mm (about 1/5-inch) but not more than 2 cm (about 4/5-inch) in size. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IB2 

 The cancer is at least 2 cm in size but not larger than 4 cm. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IB3 

 The cancer is at least 4 cm in size and limited to the cervix. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### II 

 The cancer has grown beyond the cervix and uterus, but hasn't spread to the walls of the pelvis or the lower part of the vagina. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IIA 

 The cancer has grown beyond the cervix and uterus but has not spread into the tissues next to the cervix (called the parametria). 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IIA1 

 The cancer is not larger than 4 cm (about 1 3/5 inches). 

 It not has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

 IIA2 The cancer is 4 cm or larger. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IIB 

 The cancer has grown beyond the cervix and uterus and has spread into the tissues next to the cervix (the parametria). 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### III 

 The cancer has spread to the lower part of the vagina or the walls of the pelvis. The cancer may be blocking the ureters (tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder). 

 It might or might not have not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IIIA 

 The cancer has spread to the lower part of the vagina but not the walls of the pelvis. 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IIIB 

 The cancer has grown into the walls of the pelvis and/or is blocking one or both ureters causing kidney problems (called hydronephrosis). 

 It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IIIC 

 The cancer can be any size. 

 Imaging tests or a biopsy show the cancer has spread to nearby pelvic lymph nodes (IIIC1) or para-aortic lymph nodes (IIIC2). 

 It has not spread to distant sites. 

### IV 

 The cancer has grown into the bladder or rectum or to far away organs like the lungs or bones. 

### IVA 

 The cancer has spread to the bladder or rectum or it is growing out of the pelvis. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Survival Rates for Cervical Cancer 

### IVB 

 The cancer has spread to distant organs outside the pelvic area, such as distant lymph nodes, lungs or bones. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/treating.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/treating.html) 2.www.cancer.org/cancer/diagnosis-staging/staging.html 

**References** 

Bhatla N, Aoki D, Sharma DN, and Sankaranarayanan R. FIGO Cancer Report 2018. Cancer of the cervix uteri. _Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2018_ ; 143 (Suppl):22-36. 

 Last Revised: January 3, 2020 

 lWhat is a 5-year relative survival rate? l Where do these numbers come from? l 5-year relative survival rates for cervical cancer 

Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful. 

**Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Ask your doctor how these numbers might apply to you.** 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
## What is a 5-year relative survival rate? 

A **relative survival rate** compares women with the same type and stage of cervical cancer to women in the overall population. For example, if the **5-year relative survival rate** for a specific stage of cervical cancer is 90%, it means that women who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as women who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed. 

## Where do these numbers come from? 

The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer. 

The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for cervical cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by FIGO stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages: 

 Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the cervix or uterus. 

 l 

 Regional: The cancer has spread beyond the cervix and uterus to nearby lymph nodes. 

 l 

 Distant: The cancer has spread to nearby organs (like the bladder or rectum) or distant parts of the body such as the lungs or bones. 

 l 

## 5-year relative survival rates for cervical cancer 

Based on women diagnosed with cervical cancer between 2013 and 2019. 

 SEER* Stage 5-year Relative Survival Rate 

 Localized 91% 

 Regional 60% 

 Distant 19% 

 All SEER stages combined 67% 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# Questions to Ask About Cervical Cancer 

*SEER= Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results 

**Understanding the numbers** 

 Women now being diagnosed with cervical cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on women who were diagnosed and treated at least five years earlier. 

 l 

 These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment. 

 l 

 These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age, overall health, how well the cancer responds to treatment, and other factors will also affect your outlook. 

 l 

**References** 

American Cancer Society. _Cancer Facts & Figures 2024._ Atlanta : American Cancer Society; 2024. 

 Last Revised: January 17, 2024 

 lWhen you're told you have cervical cancer l When deciding on a treatment plan l During treatment 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 l After treatment 

It is important for you to have frank, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all of your questions, to help you make informed treatment and life decisions. Here are some questions to consider. 

## When you're told you have cervical cancer 

 l What type^1 of cervical cancer do I have? l Has my cancer spread outside the cervix? l Can the stage of my cancer be determined and what does that mean? l Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment? l Do I need to see any other doctors or health professionals? If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me? 

 l 

## When deciding on a treatment plan 

 l What are my treatment^2 choices? l What treatment do you recommend and why? l How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer? l Should I get a second opinion^3? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone? l What would the goal of the treatment be? l How quickly do we need to decide on treatment? l What should I do to be ready for treatment? l How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done? What risks or side effects are there to the treatments you suggest? Are there things I can do to reduce these side effects? 

 l 

 l How might treatment affect my daily activities? l Will the treatment put me into menopause early? l Will I need hormone replacement therapy after treatment? If so, is it safe? What are the chances my cancer will recur (come back) with these treatment plans? 

 l 

 l What will we do if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer recurs? l Will I be able to have children^4 after my treatment? l What are my treatment options if I want to have children in the future? 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
## During treatment 

Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful. 

 lHow will we know if the treatment is working? l Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects^5? l What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away? l How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends? l Do I need to change what I eat during treatment^6? l Are there any limits on what I can do? l Can I have sex during treatment^7? Will my sex life change after treatment? l What kind of exercise should I do, and how often? Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed^8? 

 l 

## After treatment 

 l Will I need a special diet after treatment? l Are there any limits on what I can do? l What other symptoms should I watch for? l What kind of exercise should I do now? l What type of follow-up will I need after treatment^9? l How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests? l Will I need any blood tests? l How will we know if the cancer has come back^10? What should I watch for? l What will my options be if the cancer comes back? 

Along with these examples, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times. Or you might ask if you qualify for a clinical trial. 

Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about speaking with your health care team, see The Doctor


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Patient Relationship^11. 

## Hyperlinks 

1. [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/about/what-is-cervical-cancer.html](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/about/what-is-cervical-cancer.html) 2.www.cancer.org/cancer/types/cervical-cancer/treating.html     [http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/finding-care/seeking-a-second-](http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/finding-care/seeking-a-second-)     opinion.html 

### 3. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/fertility-and-sexual-sideeffects.html 

### 4. 

 5.www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects.html 6.www.cancer.org/cancer/survivorship/coping/nutrition/once-treatment-starts.html http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/fertility-and-sexual-sideeffects.html 

### 7. 

 http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/side-effects/changes-in-mood-orthinking.html 

### 8. 

 9.www.cancer.org/cancer/survivorship.html 10.www.cancer.org/cancer/survivorship/long-term-health-concerns/recurrence.html http://www.cancer.org/cancer/managing-cancer/finding-care/the-doctor-patientrelationship.html 

### 11. 

 Last Revised: January 3, 2020 

**Written by** 

The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team (https://www.cancer.org/cancer/acs-medical-content-and-news-staff.html) 

Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as editors and translators with extensive experience in medical writing. 

American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For reprint requests, please see our Content Usage Policy (www.cancer.org/aboutus/policies/content-usage.html). **cancer.org | 1.800.227.2345** 


