## WHO guideline for screening and treatment 

## of cervical pre-cancer lesions for 

## cervical cancer prevention, second edition: 

### use of mRNA tests for human papillomavirus (HPV) 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
#### WHO guideline for screening and treatment 

#### of cervical pre-cancer lesions for 

#### cervical cancer prevention, second edition: 

##### use of mRNA tests for human papillomavirus (HPV) 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition: use of mRNA tests for human papillomavirus (HPV)** 

ISBN 978-92-4-004043-4 (electronic version) ISBN 978-92-4-004044-1 (print version) 

**© World Health Organization 2021** 

Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO; _https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo_ ). 

Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and adapt the work for non-commercial purposes, provided the work is appropriately cited, as indicated below. In any use of this work, there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any specific organization, products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. If you adapt the work, then you must license your work under the same or equivalent Creative Commons licence. If you create a translation of this work, you should add the following disclaimer along with the suggested citation: “This translation was not created by the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO is not responsible for the content or accuracy of this translation. The original English edition shall be the binding and authentic edition”. 

Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall be conducted in accordance with the mediation rules of the World Intellectual Property Organization ( _[http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/](http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/)_ ). 

**Suggested citation.** WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention: use of mRNA tests for human papillomavirus (HPV). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Licence: _CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO_. 

**Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data.** CIP data are available at _[http://apps.who.int/iris](http://apps.who.int/iris)_. 

**Sales, rights and licensing.** To purchase WHO publications, see _[http://apps.who.int/bookorders](http://apps.who.int/bookorders)_. To submit requests for commercial use and queries on rights and licensing, see _[http://www.who.int/about/licensing](http://www.who.int/about/licensing)_. 

**Third-party materials.** If you wish to reuse material from this work that is attributed to a third party, such as tables, figures or images, it is your responsibility to determine whether permission is needed for that reuse and to obtain permission from the copyright holder. The risk of claims resulting from infringement of any third-party-owned component in the work rests solely with the user. 

**General disclaimers.** The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of WHO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. 

The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters. 

All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall WHO be liable for damages arising from its use. 

Design: Studio FFFOG Editing, layout and proofreading: Green Ink, United Kingdom 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
### Contents 

 Contents iii 

 Acknowledgements vi 

 Acronyms and abbreviations viii 

 Executive summary ix Background ix Methods x Summary of recommendations for the use of HPV mRNA testing to prevent cervical cancer xi 

**1. Introduction 1**     1.1 Background 1     1.2 HPV mRNA technology and interpretation of test results 3     1.3 Phased approach for development of updated recommendations        and purpose of this guideline 4     1.4 Previous and existing WHO recommendations for screening and        treatment to prevent cervical cancer and definitions 5     1.5 Target audience 7 

**2. Methods for development of recommendations on HPV mRNA testing 9**     2.1 Groups contributing to the guideline development process 9     2.2 Scoping review and appraisal of the existing recommendations 10     2.3 Priority algorithms 11     2.4 Outcomes 12     2.5 Syntheses of evidence 13     2.6 Development of the recommendations 16     2.7 Management of the external peer review 17 

**3. Recommendations on HPV mRNA testing 18** 

**4. Research gaps and further considerations for HPV mRNA testing 21** 

**5. Dissemination and updating of the guideline 22**     5.1 Guideline dissemination and impact 22     5.2 Guideline update 23 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**WEB ANNEX. EVIDENCE-TO-DECISION FRAMEWORK FOR mRNA TESTING FOR HPV** Available at: _https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/350557_ 

 Contents iv 

 References 24 

 Annexes 27 Annex 1. Guideline groups 28 Annex 2. Evidence-gathering teams and guideline task groups 36 Annex 3. Declarations of interests 37 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 39 Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 45 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**The Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research and the Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes at the World Health Organization (WHO)** would like to thank members of the Guideline Development Group (GDG) for their consistent availability and commitment to making this guideline possible, and the members of the External Review Group (ERG) and all other external contributors for their work. The Departments are also grateful to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) for the literature reviews performed in the context of the updating of the _IARC handbooks of cancer prevention: cervical cancer screening, Vol. 18_ (2021), which were extremely useful for this guideline development process. Special thanks to Nancy Santesso, the guideline methodologist from McMaster University, who also led the systematic review process, and thank you to all the members of the systematic review teams, coordinated by Nancy Santesso. The names of the members of the GDG, ERG and of the other contributors, in particular systematic reviewers, modellers and costing teams, are listed below, with full details provided in _Annexes 1–3_. We appreciate the overall support of the WHO Guidelines Review Committee (GRC) Secretariat during the guideline development process, with grateful thanks to Rebekah Thomas Bosco who is leading the GRC Secretariat. 

**The WHO Steering Group** was composed of Nathalie Broutet, Shona Dala, Linda Eckert (who also supported the GDG, the working groups for specific aspects of the guideline, and the WHO Secretariat), Morkor Newman and Ajay Rangaraj. This group was assisted by Myriam Cortes and Jane Werunga-Ndanareh. Nathalie Broutet and Shona Dalal also led the guideline development process. 

**The members of the GDG** were Claire Achieng, Silvina Arrossi, Muhammad Atif Waqar, Ruth Awori, Ruanne Barnabas, Itamar Bento Claro, Neerja Bhatla, Marie-Claude Boily, Laia Bruni, Joanna Cain, Lameck Chinula, Z. Mike Chirenje (GDG Co-Chair), Michael Chung, Flavia Miranda Correa, Miriam Cremer, Teresa Darragh, Lynette Denny, Silvia De Sanjose, Mamadou Diop, Wachara Eamratsameekool, Danielle Engel, Julia Gage, Ali Ghanbari-Motlagh, Patti Gravitt, Margaret Happy, Tarek Hashem, Rolando Herrero, Priscilla Ingbian, Ebony Johnson, Bayarsaikhan Luvsandorj, Anne Mackie, Mauricio Maza, Kelle Moley, Sebitloane Motshedisi, Nelly Mugo, Raul Murillo, Laura Muzingwani, Ashrafun Nessa, Dorcas Obiri-Yeboah, Gina Ogilvie, Patrick Petignat, Maria Alejandra Picconi, Leeya Pinder, Walter Prendiville, Veronica Reis, Gracia Violetta Ross Quiroga, Vikrant Sahasrabuddhe, Pete Sasieni, Anna Shakarishvili, Netsanet Shiferaw, Petra Tenhoope-Bender, Myint Myint Thinn, Kerry Thomson, Julie Torode (GDG Co-Chair), Nicolas Wentzensen and Fanghui Zhao. 

**The members of the ERG** were Raveena Chowdhury, Heather Cubie, Suzanne Garland, Sarita Ghimire, Zaki El Hanchi, Ha Hyeong In, Oh Jin Kyoung, Alejandra Meglioli, Mohammed Moawia, Lim Myong Cheol, Angélica Nogueira, Mark Schiffman, Saritha Shamsunder, Vanita Suri, Carolina Teran, Ted Trimble, Gino Venegas and Heather White. 

### Acknowledgements 

 Acknowledgements v 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**External contributors to the evidence profiles** were Marc Arbyn, Karen Canfell, Michael Caruana, Owen Demke, Cindy Gavreau, Michaela Hall, Adam Keane, Helen Kelly, James Killen, Beatrice Lauby-Secretan, Gigi Lui, Diep Nguyen and Kate Simms. 

**The following individuals acted as observers at the GDG meeting:** Benjamin Anderson, J. (Hans) Berkhof, Michelle Chevalier, Smiljka de Lussigny, Eduardo Franco, Lisa Pei-Ching Huang, Krishna Jafa, Jose Jeronimo, Somesh Kumar, Ilana Lapidos-Salaiz, David Mesher, Jasantha Odayar, Groesbeck Parham, Carmen Perez Casas and Felipe Roitberg. 

**The WHO Secretariat included** Maribel Almonte Pacheco, Prebo Barango, Partha Basu, Paul Bloem, Nathalie Broutet, Gary Clifford, Marilys Corbex, Myriam Cortes, Shona Dalal, Jean-Marie Dangou, Maeve De Mello, Gampo Dorji, Linda Eckert, Fayad El Sheikh, Elena Fidarova, Massimo Ghidinelli, Karima Gholbzouri, Rodolfo Gómez Ponce de León, Sami Gottlieb, Joumana George Hermez, Raymond Hutubessy, Andre Ilbawi, Naoko Ishikawa, Chandani Anoma Jayathilaka, Sharon Kapambwe, Rajat Khosla, Stephanie Yetunde Kuku, Hugues Lago, Beatrice Lauby-Secretan, Silvana Luciani, Priya Mannava, Dara Masoud, Manjulaa Narasimhan, Elick Narayan, Morkor Newman, Leopold Ouedraogo, Tina Purnat, Neena Raina, Ajay Rangaraj, Leanne Margaret Riley, Anita Sands, Catherine Sauvaget, Tshidi Sebitloane, Mukta Sharma, Hai-rim Shin, Slim Slama, Vitaly Smelov, Howard Sobel, Ute Ströher, Josaia Tiko, Huong Tran, Adriana Velazquez Berumen, Lara Vojnov and Hongyi Xu. 

**Funding** for the preparation, development and printing of the guideline was provided by the UNDP-UNFPA-UNICEF-WHO-World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), with the support of the United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and Unitaid. 

 Acknowledgements vi 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**AIS** adenocarcinoma in situ 

**CIN** cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 

**CKC** cold knife conization 

**DOI** declaration of interest 

**ERG** External Review Group 

**EtD** evidence-to-decision 

**GDG** Guideline Development Group 

**GRC** Guidelines Review Committee 

**GRADE** Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation 

**HPV** human papillomavirus 

**HRP** UNDP-UNFPA-UNICEF-WHO-World Bank Special Programme of Research, 

 Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction 

**IARC** International Agency for Research on Cancer 

**LEEP** loop electrosurgical excision procedure (also known as LLETZ) 

**LLETZ** large-loop excision of the transformation zone (also known as LEEP) 

**mRNA** messenger ribonucleic acid (referring to HPV E6/E7 messenger RNA) 

**NAAT** nucleic acid amplification test 

**PEPFAR** The United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 

**PICO** population (P), intervention (I), comparator (C), outcome (O) 

**SDG** Sustainable Development Goal 

**UNDP** United Nations Development Programme 

**UNFPA** United Nations Population Fund 

**UNICEF** United Nations Children’s Fund 

**USAID** United States Agency for International Development 

**VIA** visual inspection with acetic acid 

**WHO** World Health Organization 

### Acronyms and abbreviations 

 Acronyms and abbreviations vii 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**Background** 

Cervical cancer is a leading cause of mortality among women. In 2020, an estimated 604 000 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer worldwide and about 342 000 women died from the disease. Cervical cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in 23 countries and is the leading cause of cancer death in 36 countries. The vast majority of these countries are in sub-Saharan Africa, Melanesia, South America and South-Eastern Asia. 

In May 2018, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO), issued a call to action for the elimination of cervical cancer. In November 2020, the Director-General launched the Global Strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer, including the following targets for each of the three pillars for 2030: 90% human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination coverage of eligible girls, 70% screening coverage with a high-performance test and 90% of women with a positive screening test or a cervical lesion managed appropriately. Following the launch of the Global Strategy, a large panel of experts met to define the key areas of focus to increase access to screening and treatment to reach the 2030 targets. One of the agreed areas of focus was to update the existing WHO recommendations for screening and treatment to prevent cervical cancer, and to simplify the algorithms. 

It was decided that the updated guideline and recommendations would be developed in four phases. The output of the first phase was a large set of recommendations on screening and treatment and the clinical algorithms for the most commonly used screening and triage strategies (with a focus on HPV DNA-based screening tests) for both the general population of women (i.e. women who are presumed or confirmed to be HIV-negative) and those living with HIV. This output was recently published in the _WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition_ (2021).^1 This current guideline delivers the initial output of the second phase of the guideline update: recommendations for the use of HPV mRNA (messenger ribonucleic acid) tests for screening to detect cervical pre-cancer and prevent cervical cancer. 

1 Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240030824 

### Executive summary 

 Executive Summary viii 

**Two approaches to screening and treatment are distinguished:** 

- In the **“screen-and-treat approach”** , the decision to treat is     based on a positive primary screening test only. 

- In the **“screen, triage and treat approach”** , the decision to     treat is based on a positive primary screening test followed     by a positive second test (a “triage” test), with or without     histologically confirmed diagnosis. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
Human papillomavirus (HPV) E6/E7 messenger RNA detection (mRNA) is an alternative method to HPV DNA tests for HPV detection. The mRNA technologies involve detection of mRNA of E6/ E7 oncoproteins that are responsible for HPV-mediated oncogenic transformation of epithelial cells. HPV E6/E7 mRNA detection could be more specific than detection of the viral HPV DNA because HPV mRNA tests correlate with actual virus replication, which is further down the HPV pathway toward development of pre-cancer changes. Most HPV DNA tests target the 13–14 most oncogenic HPV types. The HPV mRNA tests vary; one test targets all 14 of the most oncogenic types, while others target fewer oncogenic types. 

**Methods** 

The guideline has been developed according to the _WHO handbook for guideline development, second edition_ (2014). The Guideline Development Group (GDG) for this guideline was formed in early 2019 and, based on their clinical expertise, research, and knowledge of tests in development, initially identified 13 clinical algorithms (involving several different screening tests) for screening and treatment that could be evaluated. In the first iteration of the updated guideline,^1 seven algorithms were prioritized for evaluation, and four more algorithms are addressed in this current guideline publication. 

The GDG, WHO Steering Group and WHO Secretariat, methodologists and technical groups (see _Annex 1_ ) met several times to discuss the evidence pertaining to the previously established PICO (population, intervention, comparator, outcome) questions related to the priority algorithms using HPV mRNA testing. A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted to evaluate cross-sectional and longitudinal accuracy of HPV mRNA testing in screening and treatment algorithms. We used the methods for evidence synthesis and mathematical modelling as applied in the published guideline for the first phase of this guideline update: when relevant evidence was not available in primary research, a mathematical disease model was used to estimate the risk of important outcomes (e.g. recurrence of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN], and cervical cancer) associated with the use of different screening and treatment strategies. In addition, modelling evaluated the impact and cost-effectiveness of the different screening and treatment algorithms. Systematic literature reviews were previously conducted (during the first phase of the guideline update) on acceptability, feasibility, resources and equity aspects of the use of different screening tests. Surveys were also previously conducted on the feasibility of implementation (among GDG members), and on the acceptability and values and preferences of people using these services. These existing reports were also drawn upon for the purposes of this phase of the guideline update because most reports targeted HPV tests in general and did not distinguish between HPV DNA and HPV mRNA tests. GDG meetings took place to review and assess the evidence and determine the final recommendations presented in this guideline, applying the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology. 

 Executive Summary ix 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Executive Summary xvi 

 Summary of recommendations for the use of HPV mRNA testing to prevent cervical cancer 

In this present publication, only recommendations for the use of HPV mRNA testing are presented. For other recommendations, please refer to the July 2021 publication of the _WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition_. 

**In the general population of women, HPV DNA is the recommended primary screening test, but HPV mRNA detection may also be used.** 

**When providing HPV mRNA testing, WHO suggests:** 

**- providing it with or without triage;** 

**- using samples taken by the health-care provider; and** 

**- 5-year screening intervals.** 

_This is a conditional recommendation, based on low-certainty evidence._ 

**Remarks:** 

- HPV DNA is the recommended screening test. Choosing the alternative option of HPV mRNA     testing implies having the capacity to provide follow-up screening at 5-year intervals. 

**Note: No recommendation was made for using HPV mRNA in women living with HIV because evidence on the outcomes of using HPV mRNA detection applicable to this population was not identified.** 

**RECOMMENDATION:** 

 WHO suggests that HPV mRNA detection using samples taken by the health-care provider may be used as a primary screening test, either with or without triage, to prevent cervical cancer in the general population of women with regular screening every 5 years. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**1.1 Background** 

Cervical cancer is a leading cause of mortality among women. In 2020, an estimated 604 000 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer worldwide and about 342 000 women died from the disease. Cervical cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in 23 countries and is the leading cause of cancer death in 36 countries. The vast majority of these countries are in sub-Saharan Africa, Melanesia, South America, and South-Eastern Asia _(1)_. 

In May 2018, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO), issued a call to action for the elimination of cervical cancer. A WHO Global Strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem was presented and unanimously endorsed by the Seventy-third World Health Assembly in August 2020. Subsequently, WHO officially launched the Global Strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer on 17 November 2020.^2 

**The targets of the Global Strategy are to achieve, by 2030:** 

**- 90% of girls fully vaccinated with human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine by age 15 years** 

**- 70% of women screened with a high-performance test by 35 years of age and again by**     **45 years of age** 

**- 90% of women identified with cervical disease receive treatment (90% of women with**     **pre-cancer treated, and 90% of women with invasive cancer managed)** _(2)_**.** 

In the context of this Global Strategy, countries are updating their protocols for the prevention of cervical cancer and for the care and treatment of affected women. Cervical cancer prevention also plays an integral role in reaching the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), both for health (SDG 3) and gender equality (SDG 5). 

To prevent cervical cancer, women can be screened using various tests to identify those who have or are at risk of cervical pre-cancer (see _Table 1.1_ ). Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) is characterized by cellular changes in the transformation zone of the cervix. CIN is typically caused by infections with HPV, especially the high-risk HPV types such as strains 16 and 18 (these two strains cause more than 70% of cervical cancers) _(3, 4)_. CIN1 lesions – also referred to as low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions – are morphological correlates of HPV infections. CIN2/3 lesions 

- also referred to as high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions – are correlates of cervical pre-cancers that, if left untreated, may progress into cervical cancer (for further details, refer to Chapter 1 of WHO’s _Comprehensive cervical cancer control guidance [5]_ ). 

### 1. Introduction 

 Introduction 1 

(^2) Launch page: _https://www.who.int/news-room/events/detail/2020/11/17/default-calendar/launch-of-the-global-strategyto-accelerate-the-elimination-of-cervical-cancer_ 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
The traditional method to screen women for cervical cancer has been cytology (the Papanicolaou test, also known as the Pap smear or smear test). When cytology results are positive, the diagnosis is confirmed by colposcopy, and appropriate treatment is informed by biopsy of suspicious lesions for histological diagnosis. 

Newer screening tests introduced in the last 15 years include visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA), and molecular tests, mainly high-risk HPV DNA-based tests,^3 which are suitable for use in all settings (Table 1.1). More recently, even newer tests and techniques have been developed: (i) other molecular tests such as those based on HPV mRNA, oncoprotein detection or DNA methylation; (ii) more objective tests performed on cytological samples such as p16/Ki-67 dual staining; and (iii) more advanced visual inspection tests based on artificial intelligence/machine learning platforms (e.g. automated visual evaluation of digital images) _(6–9)_. 

 Introduction 2 

 Molecular Cytologic Visual inspection 

 Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT)a » high-risk HPV DNA/ NAAT » mRNA 

 DNA methylationb 

 Protein biomarkersb » HPV antibodies » oncoproteins 

 Conventional Pap smeara 

 Liquid-based cytology (LBC)a 

 Dual staining to identify p16 and Ki-67a 

 Visual inspection with acetic acid or with Lugol’s iodine (VIA/VILI)a » naked eye » magnified by colposcope or camera 

 Automated visual evaluation of digital imagesb 

**Table 1.1 Three approaches to cervical cancer screening and future tests** 

a Current tests b Tests under evaluation (future tests). 

(^3) In this guideline, “an HPV DNA test” refers to a high-risk HPV DNA test, and “an HPV mRNA test” refers to an HPV E6/E7 messenger RNA test. Both of these tests are nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs). 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Introduction 3 

**1.2 HPV mRNA technology and interpretation of test results** 

The focus of this edition of the updated guideline is the use of HPV mRNA tests (HPV E6/E7 messenger RNA detection) for HPV detection as an alternative method to HPV DNA tests for HPV detection. The virus infecting the basal cell layer of the cervical epithelium is comprised of a double-stranded DNA at its core and a protein coat (capsid). The DNA tests detect either the viral DNA through hybridization technique or a highly conserved region of the L1 capsid protein or of the E genes using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Hence, HPV DNA tests detect the presence of the virus by detecting the viral DNA. The HPV mRNA tests detect transcripts of the viral E6 and E7 oncoproteins, which are responsible for HPV-mediated oncogenic transformation of epithelial cells. 

Persistent infection from any of the high-risk types of HPV is essential for cervical oncogenesis. The process of carcinogenesis starts with the virus particles entering the basal layer of the cervical epithelium and integration of their DNA with the host cellular DNA. As the carcinogenic process advances, the E6 and E7 oncoproteins are expressed, and these proteins are primarily responsible for neoplastic transformation. The E7 protein can bind and degrade retinoblastoma (pRb) tumour suppressor protein, which initiates uncontrolled activation of the cell cycle. The E6 protein degrades p53 (another tumour suppressor protein), inhibiting apoptosis (programmed cell death), and upregulating telomerase activity. Degradation of the key tumour suppression proteins leads to cell cycle deregulation and cellular immortalization, thus kickstarting the process of carcinogenesis. The level of E6 and E7 expression of high-risk HPV types increases as the grade of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia worsens. Since these changes in HPV mRNA expression of E6/E7 oncoproteins directly underlie the neoplastic phenotype (i.e. HPV mRNA tests correlate with actual virus replication, which is further down the HPV pathway towards development of pre-cancer changes), detection of HPV E6/E7 mRNA of these two oncoproteins could be more specific than detection of the HPV viral DNA. 

Most HPV DNA tests target the 13–14 most oncogenic HPV types, whereas the HPV mRNA tests vary. At present there is only one technology commercially available and widely documented in the literature, called the AptimaTM mRNA assay, that can qualitatively detect the expression of HPV E6 and E7 mRNA from all 14 high-risk types of HPV (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68) through real-time amplification. This system can carry out up to 250 tests in approximately five hours. There are two other assays that target fewer oncogenic types, but information and use remains limited at this time. 

HPV mRNA testing is based on pooled detection of HPV E6/E7 mRNA from high-risk types of HPV. The test is considered positive if HPV E6/E7 mRNA is above the detection threshold for any individual type or for multiple types. The AptimaTM mRNA assay does not separate out or give information on individual genotypes, such as HPV16/18/45. However, a separate assay is available that can be used to detect HPV16/18/45 among women testing positive on the pooled assay. It includes an internal control that monitors the presence of nucleic acid, and its processing and amplification. A result is considered negative when HPV mRNA in a sample is below the detection threshold and the internal control is positive. A result is considered positive when HPV mRNA in a sample is above the detection threshold, independent of the internal control result. Results are considered invalid when both HPV mRNA and the internal control are below the detection limit _(10)_. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Introduction 4 

 1.3 Phased approach for development of updated recommendations and purpose of this guideline 

Following the 2020 launch of the Global Strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem, a large panel of experts met to define the key areas of focus to increase access to screening and treatment to reach the 2030 targets. One of the agreed areas of focus was to update the existing 2013 _WHO guidelines for screening and treatment of precancerous lesions for cervical cancer prevention (11)_ , and to simplify the algorithms. 

It was decided that WHO’s updated cervical cancer screening and treatment guidance would be developed in four phases: 

###### Guideline objective: 

 To improve national strategies for screening and treatment to prevent cervical cancer in all women, including women living with HIV. 

 Updated recommendations on screening and treatment and the clinical algorithms for the most commonly used primary screening tests and triage strategies (HPV DNA tests, cytology and VIA) for both women in general (i.e. women who are presumed or confirmed to be HIV-negative) and those living with HIV. Phase 1 also addresses routine screening programmes, the ages at which to initiate and stop screening, and the frequency of screening. 

**Phase 1** 

 Evaluate the evidence and develop recommendations for the clinical algorithms using (a) HPV mRNA tests and (b) dual-stain cytology for the general population of women and for women living with HIV. 

**Phase 2** 

 Develop recommendations for the implementation of these screening and Phase 3 treatment strategies. 

 Establish a consolidated “living guideline” for screening and treatment tests and algorithms (combining all the output from Phases 1–3), which will allow the recommendations to be updated as new evidence becomes available and is evaluated. 

**Phase 4** 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Introduction 5 

The output of Phase 1 was a guideline that was published and launched in July 2021, presenting a large set of recommendations and good practice statements, with a primary focus on the use of HPV DNA tests. For the rationale for the development of the new edition of recommendations for screening and treatment to prevent cervical cancer, please refer to section 1.3 of that guideline _(12)_. 

Since the HPV mRNA test is in clinical use as a recognized option for HPV nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT), the GDG prioritized evaluating the evidence on HPV mRNA testing to make recommendations for its use. The objective in this phase of the guideline update was therefore to develop recommendations for the use of HPV mRNA detection as a primary screening test for cervical cancer prevention – both in the general population of women and in women living with HIV. In addition to evidence gathered for this update process, this guideline is also supported by evidence compiled in the _IARC handbooks of cancer prevention: cervical cancer screening, Vol. 18_ , which considers HPV mRNA as a NAAT that can be used for cervical cancer screening _(13, 14)_. 

The clinical flowcharts for the algorithms presented in this guideline include HPV mRNA-based screening strategies and follow-up testing at 12 months post-treatment (see _Annex 4_ ). In the near future, the recommendations in this guideline will be integrated with the recommendations recently published in _WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition (12)_ , along with the outputs of the upcoming phase on dual-stain cytology screening and the forthcoming recommendations on implementation of screening and treatment strategies, to develop a full consolidated version of this guidance. 

 1.4 Previous and existing WHO recommendations for screening and treatment to prevent cervical cancer and definitions 

In 2006, WHO published _Comprehensive cervical cancer control: a guide to essential practice_ (C4GEP), which was updated in a second edition in 2014 _(15)_ , consolidating all the recommendations for screening and treatment to prevent and treat cervical cancer up to that year. The consolidated C4GEP included the WHO recommendations for HPV vaccination, treatment of cervical cancer and pre-cancer lesions, and palliative care, as well as the recommendations from the previous edition (2013) of this guideline: _WHO guidelines for screening and treatment of precancerous lesions for cervical cancer prevention (11)_. In 2019, WHO published guidance on the use of thermal ablation for treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions _(16)_ , and in 2020, WHO published guidance documents to support the introduction and scale-up of screening and treatment interventions, specifically relating to HPV testing and relevant medical devices _(17)_. 

In the updated second edition of the recommendations on screening and treatment for cervical cancer prevention, two populations of women are referred to: women living with HIV and the general population of women, which refers to women who are presumed or confirmed HIV-negative, but whose HIV status may be unknown. In addition, two approaches to screening and treatment are distinguished, the “screen-and-treat approach” and the “screen, triage and treat approach”. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Introduction 6 

In a **screen-and-treat approach** , treatment is provided based on a positive primary screening test alone, without triage (i.e. no second screening test and no histopathological diagnosis). 

- When the patient is eligible for ablative treatment, this should ideally be done immediately, at the     same visit as the screening test (the single-visit approach). At some facilities, this is not feasible     and a second visit is needed (the multiple-visit approach). 

- Women who are not eligible for ablation can have excisional treatment on the same day if the     clinic has the capacity for large-loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ).^4 If LLETZ     is not available on-site, women need to be referred for the excisional treatment or for further     evaluation. 

In a **screen, triage and treat approach** , the triage test is done if the primary screening test is positive, and the decision to treat is made when both the primary test and the triage test are positive. 

- A positive triage test can lead to colposcopy with biopsy and histopathological examination     for diagnosis to determine the appropriate treatment. The implementation of colposcopy and     biopsy can be challenging, however, so this guideline also considers triage strategies that are not     dependent on the availability of colposcopy. 

- When the primary screening test is positive, and the triage test is negative, women need     appropriate follow-up evaluation at a specified date according to the recommendations. 

The publication of the output of Phase 1 of the update of the recommendations for screening and treatment to prevent cervical cancer (in July 2021) presented 23 recommendations and 7 good 

**Screening and treatment approaches** 

- In the **“screen-and-treat approach”** , the decision     to treat is based on a positive primary screening     test only. 

- In the **“screen, triage and treat approach”** , the     decision to treat is based on a positive primary     screening test followed by a positive second test     (a “triage” test), with or without histologically     confirmed diagnosis. 

(^3) In this guideline, the term LLETZ is used to refer to excision of the transformation zone. In some countries, the term LEEP (loop electrosurgical excision procedure) is used, and the two terms are often used interchangeably. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
practice statements _(12)_. Those recommendations focused mainly on the use of HPV DNA testing as the primary screening test. Table 1.2 provides a summary of the recommendations. 

The full set of recommendations is provided in the 2021 publication, _WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition (12)_ , and also in _Annex 5_ of this guideline. 

**1.5 Target audience** 

This document is intended primarily for policy-makers, programme managers, programme officers and other professionals in the health sector who have responsibility for choosing strategies for cervical cancer prevention, at country, regional and district levels. Health-care professionals – such as doctors, nurses and community health workers working in reproductive health programmes, antenatal and postnatal services, family planning services, HIV/AIDS control programmes and in clinics that care for women at the district and primary health care levels – may also consult this document to understand how recommendations are developed and why it is vitally important to select and implement evidence-based strategies to prevent cervical cancer. 

This document will also be informative in an adapted form for women, girls and their families in making decisions about cervical cancer screening and treatment. 

 Summary recommendation for the general population of women 

 Summary recommendation for women living with HIV 

 WHO suggests using either of the following strategies for cervical cancer prevention among the general population of women: » HPV DNA detection in a screen-and-treat approach starting at the age of 30 years with regular screening every 5 to 10 years. » HPV DNA detection in a screen, triage and treat approach starting at the age of 30 years with regular screening every 5 to 10 years. 

 WHO suggests using the following strategy for cervical cancer prevention among women living with HIV: » HPV DNA detection in a screen, triage and treat approach starting at the age of 25 years with regular screening every 3 to 5 years. 

**Table 1.2: Summary recommendations from the** **_WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition:_** **HPV DNA tests** 

_Source:_ WHO (2021) _(12)_. 

 Introduction 7 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
All individuals have the right to equality and non-discrimination in sexual and reproductive health care. In this guideline, we recognize that most of the available evidence on cervical cancer is based on study populations of cisgender women, and we also recognize that cisgender women, transgender men, non-binary, gender fluid and intersex individuals born with a female reproductive system require cervical cancer prevention services. However, to be concise and facilitate readability, we use the term “women” to refer to all gender diverse people at risk for cervical cancer. Sexual and reproductive health service providers and cervical cancer prevention services must consider the needs of – and provide equal care to – all individuals independently of gender identity or its expression. 

 Introduction 8 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
This updated guideline has been developed in accordance with the methods described in the _WHO handbook for guideline development, second edition (18)_. More detailed methods are described in the recent publication of the outputs of the first phase of the guideline update _(12)_. Information in this section focuses on methods specific to this phase of the guideline update: HPV mRNA testing. 

**2.1 Groups contributing to the guideline development process** 

Lists of all members of the Guideline Development Group (GDG), External Review Group (ERG), systematic review teams, modelling teams and other contributors are provided in _Annex 1_ , with details of their expertise and affiliations. The WHO Secretariat consisted of staff from various relevant WHO departments, and staff from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). The Steering Group of the WHO Secretariat led the coordination of the development of this guideline. Members of the Secretariat who were not part of the Steering Group were kept informed of the guideline development process and participated in the discussions, in particular during meetings of the various teams. 

For the evaluation of the evidence and formulation of recommendations relating to HPV mRNA testing, the GDG comprised 53 members (35 women, 18 men), from across all six WHO regions, including representatives from civil society organizations and women’s groups, and women living with HIV. The members brought varied expertise on cervical screening and treatment. Two members acted as co-chairs and moderated the GDG meetings. An External Review Group (ERG) was also established to provide peer review for the guideline document. Its 18 members, none of whom was also a member of the GDG, had expertise in research, policy development, programme implementation and clinical care. Once the GDG had agreed on the recommendations, the ERG reviewed the full draft of the guideline and provided feedback. 

Multiple teams prepared evidence relevant to HPV mRNA testing (see details in _Annex 2_ ). 

- Two teams conducted evidence reviews relevant to HPV mRNA testing – one on test accuracy     of HPV mRNA versus HPV DNA detection for CIN2+ and CIN3+, and one on longitudinal     evidence for the use of HPV mRNA tests. 

- One team developed the mathematical model relevant to HPV mRNA testing in the general     population of women. 

- One team ran a survey of the GDG members about the feasibility concerns relating to the     priority screening algorithms (including but not limited to those involving HPV mRNA testing). 

### 2. Methods for development of 

### recommendations on HPV mRNA 

### testing 

 Methods 9 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
- One team surveyed women about their values and preferences (relating to HPV testing in     general, covering both HPV DNA and HPV mRNA). 

- Two teams conducted a systematic review of qualitative literature on values, preferences,     acceptability and feasibility, and a review of reviews on acceptability, feasibility, resources and     equity for the use of different screening tests. 

A guideline methodologist with experience of using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach _(19)_ coordinated the presentation of evidence and decision-making processes that facilitated the development of the recommendations, as stipulated in the _WHO handbook for guideline development, second edition (18)_. 

**2.1.1 Declarations and management of conflicts of interest** 

Each invited GDG member completed a written declaration of interest (DOI) form (including those who had previously completed them prior to participation in the first phase of the guideline update). The DOIs were reviewed by two members of the WHO Secretariat and no conflicts of interest were identified ( _Annex 3_ ). At the beginning of every GDG meeting, members were asked to declare any potential new conflicts of interest. 

**2.1.2 Confidentiality** 

Each GDG member also signed a confidentiality agreement at the beginning of the guideline development process, and the WHO Secretariat restated at the start of each GDG meeting that all discussions and draft recommendations were to remain confidential until publication. 

**2.2 Scoping review and appraisal of the existing recommendations** 

The questions for HPV mRNA are based on the scoping review and the prioritization of research questions and algorithms for screening and treatment that was performed by GDG members in 2019 at the start of the process of updating the WHO recommendations on this topic. The key questions relating to HPV mRNA tests (see _Table 2.1_ ) followed a similar format to those assessed for the recently published outputs of the first phase of the guideline update, referring to both the general population of women and women living with HIV. 

 Methods 10 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 11 

**2.3 Priority algorithms** 

Since screening and treatment can be done using different primary screening and triage tests, there are numerous possible combinations or algorithms. In December 2019, GDG members were surveyed to prioritize the screening and/or triage tests and the treatments that should be evaluated. Following this prioritization exercise, a subgroup of GDG members met to review the results from the survey and to agree on the algorithms to be prioritized. They reached a consensus to address seven priority algorithms in the first phase of the guideline update (see Annex 4 in that guideline _[12]_ ), and to address the following four algorithms relevant to HPV mRNA testing for this phase of the guideline, as presented in _Table 2.2_. For detailed algorithms (clinical flowcharts) based on the recommendation in this guideline, see _Annex 4_. 

**Table 2.2. The four algorithms considered** 

 Screen-and-treat approaches: 

 1 HPV mRNA as the primary screening test, followed by treatment 

 Screen, triage and treat approaches: 

 2 HPV mRNA as the primary screening test, followed by VIA triage , followed by treatment 3 HPV mRNA as the primary screening test, followed by colposcopy triage , followed by treatment 4 HPV mRNA as the primary screening test, followed by cytology triage , followed by colposcopy and treatment 

**Table 2.1. PICO questions for the recommendations in women** 

 PICO 1 Should HPV mRNA versus HPV DNA or VIA or cytology in a screen-and-treatstrategy be used in women? 

 PICO 2 Should HPV mRNA versus HPV DNA in a screen, triage and treat strategy be usedin women? 

 PICO 3 Should women be followed up at 5 or 10 years after a negative or positive HPVmRNA result? 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 12 

**2.4 Outcomes** 

The GDG agreed that the outcomes previously identified for the 2013 first edition of this guideline _(11)_ and for the 2021 guideline which presented the output of the first phase of the guideline update continue to be the most relevant outcomes for the new PICO questions; they are listed in _Table 2.3_. Adverse events were defined as outcomes that were a direct consequence of pre-cancer treatment and were grouped as one category, with the exception of preterm birth, which was considered a critical outcome. 

**Table 2.3. Critical outcomes for the screening and treatment recommendations** 

 Critical outcomes 

 Cervical cancer 

 Mortality 

 High-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or worse (CIN2+) 

 HPV infection 

 Preterm birth 

 Pre-cancer treatments 

 Adverse events (direct consequence of pre-cancer treatment): 

- major infections or bleeding 

- procedure-associated pain 

- cervical stenosis 

- infertility 

- spontaneous abortion 

- perinatal deaths 

- premature rupture of membrane 

- unnecessary interventions 

- increased viral shedding in women living with HIV Costs 

 Equity 

 Acceptability 

 Feasibility 

Note: For additional details and definitions, see Annex 5 in the previous guideline providing the output of the first phase of the guideline update (WHO, 2021) _(12)_. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 13 

**2.5 Syntheses of evidence** 

Evidence was synthesized for each PICO question according to the methods in the _WHO handbook for guideline development (18)_ , and the _Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions (20)_. The literature review performed for the development of the _IARC handbook of cancer prevention: cervical cancer screening, Vol. 18 (13)_ was also part of the evidence synthesized for the development of this guideline – details of this review and its methods have been published _(14)_. 

A systematic review of the relative diagnostic accuracy of HPV mRNA tests compared with HPV DNA tests for detecting CIN2+ and CIN3+ was also performed and published _(21)_. The literature search was conducted from 1994 up to August 2020 in PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase and Scopus, and the references of included studies were also searched for additional sources of evidence. A random effects meta-analysis of the relative clinical sensitivity and specificity of HPV mRNA tests compared with HPV DNA tests was conducted. Further details about the methods are provided in that publication. 

The certainty of the evidence from the systematic reviews, modelling and surveys was assessed using the GRADE methodology. The four levels of certainty of evidence are summarized in _Table 2.4_. 

**Table 2.4. Interpretation of the GRADE levels of certainty of evidence** 

 We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect 

 We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different 

 We have limited confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect 

 We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of the effect 

 High 

 Moderate 

 Low 

 Very low 

_Source:_ Schünemann et al., GRADE handbook (GRADEpro, 2013) _(19)_. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 14 

**2.5.1 Mathematical modelling** 

We used the Policy1-Cervix platform (developed by the Daffodil Centre, a joint venture between the University of Sydney and Cancer Council NSW, Australia), an extensively validated dynamic model of HPV transmission, vaccination, type-specific natural history, cancer survival, screening, diagnosis and treatment _(22–30)_ , to predict outcomes in women across all 78 lowand middle-income countries. The Policy1-Cervix model was one of three models used by the Cervical Cancer Elimination Modelling Consortium (CCEMC) to evaluate the impact of cervical cancer prevention interventions in 78 lowand middle-income countries _(22, 23)_. For the baseline analysis, we assumed that 70% of women attended screening at each routine screening event and 90% of women complied with follow-up. Outcomes were assessed over the lifetime of birth cohorts eligible for screening in 2030 onwards and included cervical cancer incidence and mortality, pre-cancer treatments, additional preterm deliveries as a result of pre-cancer treatment and cost-effectiveness. A range of sensitivity analyses were considered, including a range of test performance assumptions for HPV mRNA tests. For the mRNA analysis, a specific validation exercise was performed to demonstrate that the Policy1-Cervix model predictions matched the available longitudinal information on the performance of HPV mRNA technology for cervical screening. Detailed methods for the mathematical modelling are presented in Supplementary material 13a, in _Web annex A: syntheses of evidence (31)_. 

**2.5.2 Values and preferences** 

The results from the systematic review performed for the first phase of the guideline update that addressed, among other considerations, the values and preferences of end-users, health-care providers and other stakeholders were also used to address these considerations in this phase. The results of the literature review were compiled by study design and methodology, location and population, and presented to the GDG. The evidence was assessed using the GRADE-CERQual approach (Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative Research)^5 and confidence in the evidence was rated from very low to high in the summary of findings. This information was presented in evidence tables and in the evidence-to-decision (EtD) framework to inform the development of the recommendations by the GDG (see _Web annex: EtD framework for mRNA testing for HPV_ ), and the findings are also presented in Supplementary material 10, in _Web annex A: syntheses of evidence (31)_. 

For primary data, we also used the results of the voluntary and anonymous survey distributed via SurveyMonkey during the first phase of the guideline update. The survey was open to all women and girls aged 15 years and older, regardless of their prior cervical cancer screening or treatment status. The survey received approval from the WHO Ethics Review Committee and was run in English and French from 22 June to 18 September 2020. Awareness of the survey had been raised among a wide range of civil society groups through a webinar. The survey was also promoted through the Union for International Cancer Control and the WHO advisory group of women living with HIV, and shared through WHO regional focal points for Cervical Cancer Elimination Initiative. 

(^5) Further information is available at: _[http://www.cerqual.org](http://www.cerqual.org)_ 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 15 

The responses from the 561 respondents, including their qualitative responses to open-ended questions, were analysed. The detailed methods and results are available in Supplementary material 9, in _Web annex A: syntheses of evidence (31)_. 

Both the systematic review and the survey considered screening tests and HPV tests, but did not differentiate between HPV DNA and HPV mRNA tests as both are NAATs and the process from the client’s perspective is similar. We therefore used this evidence to inform judgements for the recommendations for HPV mRNA testing. 

**2.5.3 Feasibility, acceptability, resources and equity considerations** 

Due to the paucity of data related to these considerations for HPV mRNA testing, evidence for HPV DNA testing was used to inform judgements, as both tests are NAATs. This evidence came from (i) a survey of the GDG members and (ii) a review of reviews. 

The survey of GDG members was administered via SurveyMonkey to assess the implementation feasibility considerations for all of the priority algorithms. The survey was developed using the context and implementation of complex interventions (CICI) framework _(32)_. Each GDG member was asked about their level of concern about each algorithm being able to sustainably meet the large-scale goal of cervical cancer elimination. The following components of cervical cancer screening and management service delivery were queried separately according to the priority algorithm: demand generation, access to screening and the follow-up management of positives, workforce training, infrastructure development and maintenance, development and maintenance of the screening registry, and cost and integration with other priority health services. The considerations of the GDG members were assessed for the following eight stakeholder groups: health authorities at the national level, health authorities at the regional level, professional societies, providers at both the hospital and primary care levels, community health workers, clients (screened women) and the community. The detailed methods and results of the survey are provided in Supplementary material 11, in _Web annex A: syntheses of evidence (31)_. 

A review of systematic reviews of the acceptability, feasibility, resources and equity considerations for the use of different screening tests included systematic reviews published since 2010 that synthesized results from studies with quantitative or qualitative design. Further information about the methods and findings are provided in Supplementary material 12, in _Web annex A: syntheses of evidence (31)_. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 16 

**2.6 Development of the recommendations** 

All the GDG meetings that focused on formulation of recommendations were held virtually. Tables to facilitate decision-making for recommendations – evidence-to-decision (EtD) tables – were produced by the guideline methodologist for each recommendation and circulated to the GDG members before each meeting. These tables included a summary of the evidence (benefits and harms), relevant values and preferences information, and other issues, including use of resources and cost, feasibility, equity and acceptability. 

During the meeting, the EtD tables and evidence were discussed with the GDG. Following the meeting, the methodologist, systematic reviewers, modellers and WHO Steering Group assessed the GDG input and used it to write the recommendations. 

Agreement on the recommendations was made by consensus during the GDG meetings, and the final written recommendations were then approved electronically. The responses solicited via email were either to approve, approve “with the following remarks” or not approve. The GDG had agreed that, if consensus could not be reached, a majority vote of 51% would have been accepted to make recommendations – yet the group did reach a consensus on all the recommendations. 

**Strong recommendations** (worded as “WHO recommends”) were made when all the desirable consequences of the intervention **clearly** outweighed the undesirable consequences in most settings. 

**Conditional recommendations** (worded as “WHO suggests”) were made when the desirable consequences of the intervention **probably** outweighed the undesirable consequences in most settings 

_Table 2.5_ describes how strong and conditional recommendations should be interpreted. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Methods 17 

For information on important considerations for the recommendations, please refer to Chapter 3 of the published guideline which delivered the outputs of the first phase of the guideline update _(12)_. 

**2.7 Management of the external peer review** 

The draft guideline document was circulated to the External Review Group (ERG) for comment. The WHO Secretariat prepared a summary table with all ERG responses and sorted the comments by topic or section. The WHO Secretariat then reviewed the comments, which were minor wording changes, without any implications for the substance of the recommendations themselves, and the guideline document was finalized. 

**Table 2.5. Interpretation of strong and conditional recommendations** 

 Implications Strong recommendation (WHO recommends…) 

 Conditional recommendation (WHO suggests…) 

 For individuals 

 Most individuals in this situation would want the recommended course of action, and only a small proportion would not. 

 Formal decision aids are not likely to be needed to help individuals make decisions consistent with their values and preferences. 

 The majority of individuals in this situation would want the suggested course of action, but some may not. 

 For health-care providers 

 Most individuals should receive the recommended course of action. 

 Adherence to this recommendation (when it aligns with national guidelines) could be used as a quality criterion or performance indicator. 

 Clinicians should recognize that different choices may be appropriate for different individuals and that clinicians must help each individual arrive at a management decision consistent with the individual’s values and preferences. 

 Decision aids may be useful to help individuals make decisions consistent with their values and preferences. For policymakers 

 The recommendation can be adopted as policy in most situations. 

 Policy-making will require discussion and involvement of various stakeholders. 

_Source:_ Schünemann et al., GRADE handbook (GRADEpro, 2013) _(19)_ 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Important considerations for the recommendations 18 

### 3. Recommendations on HPV mRNA 

### testing 

In this present publication, only recommendations for the use of HPV mRNA testing are presented. For other recommendations, please refer to the July 2021 publication of the _WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition (12)_ , or to _Annex 5_ of this guideline. 

**In the general population of women, HPV DNA is the recommended primary screening test, but HPV mRNA detection may also be used.** 

**When providing HPV mRNA testing, WHO suggests:** 

**- providing it with or without triage;** 

**- using samples taken by the health-care provider; and** 

**- 5-year screening intervals.** 

_This is a conditional recommendation, based on low-certainty evidence._ 

**Remarks:** 

- HPV DNA is the recommended screening test. Choosing the alternative option of HPV mRNA     testing implies having the capacity to provide follow-up screening at 5-year intervals. 

**Note: No recommendation was made for using HPV mRNA in women living with HIV because evidence on the outcomes of using HPV mRNA detection applicable to this population was not identified.** 

For the detailed algorithms (clinical flowcharts) based on this recommendation, see _Annex 4_. 

**RECOMMENDATION:** 

 WHO suggests that HPV mRNA detection using samples taken by the health-care provider may be used as a primary screening test, either with or without triage, to prevent cervical cancer in the general population of women with regular screening every 5 years. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Important considerations for the recommendations 19 

**Justification** 

Despite the similar cross-sectional sensitivity and specificity of HPV mRNA testing compared with HPV DNA testing, a conditional recommendation was made for the use of HPV mRNA as a primary screening test because the longitudinal evidence on HPV mRNA test performance is uncertain. Modelling data suggest that there may be similar reductions in cervical cancer cases and deaths when using HPV mRNA testing with or without triage compared with HPV DNA testing with or without triage. In addition, there may be fewer treatments for pre-cancerous lesions when using HPV mRNA testing. However, the evidence from the mathematical model is uncertain, as the predicted reductions in cases and deaths when using HPV mRNA testing overlap with the uncertainty intervals for those with HPV DNA testing, and the model validation was performed against limited longitudinal data. Some longitudinal data with follow-up of more than five years and a model trial validation exercise (based on follow-up at 4–7 years) suggest that the incidence of CIN3+ may be higher in women who were negative for HPV mRNA compared with those who were negative for HPV DNA. There also do not appear to be other reasons related to feasibility or resources in favour of selecting HPV mRNA testing rather than HPV DNA testing. 

The evidence available did not include women living with HIV, and data from the general population of women was not applicable to that population. Therefore, no recommendation was made for women living with HIV. 

**Summary of the evidence** 

The GDG considered evidence from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies, and from mathematical modelling of long-term outcomes. Well designed and implemented cross-sectional studies consistently found that compared with HPV DNA testing, the sensitivity of HPV mRNA is likely slightly lower and the specificity slightly higher at baseline: relative sensitivity and specificity for CIN2+ are 0.97 (95% CI: 0.95–1.00) and 1.03 (95% CI: 1.02–1.05), respectively, and for CIN3+ are 0.98 (95% CI: 0.95–1.02) and 1.03 (95% CI: 1.01–1.06), respectively (based on moderate-certainty evidence) _(21)_. Few studies measured the longitudinal performance and performance over repeat rounds of screening with HPV mRNA tests. Some of the available long-term data suggest that women who test negative for HPV mRNA may have a higher subsequent incidence of CIN3+ than those who test negative for HPV DNA, especially when using longer screening intervals (5+ years), but the data are sparse and the findings are also inconsistent across studies (low-certainty evidence) (see _Web annex: EtD framework for mRNA testing for HPV_ ). 

The model used data extracted from the cross-sectional studies in the systematic review on sensitivity and specificity and was validated against the available longitudinal evidence. The findings – based on low-certainty evidence – suggest that when comparing the long-term effects of repeated rounds of HPV mRNA testing with HPV DNA testing, when implemented programmatically at 5-year screening intervals, there may be up to 8–12% higher relative cervical cancer incidence and 6–8% higher cervical cancer mortality for those screened with HPV mRNA compared with HPV DNA tests. However, after considering uncertainties in observed HPV mRNA test performance in a sensitivity analysis, the predicted reductions in cases and deaths with HPV mRNA testing overlap with the ranges of uncertainty for HPV DNA testing (for detailed results, see _Web annex: EtD framework for mRNA testing for HPV_ ). The modelling evidence also suggests that 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Important considerations for the recommendations 20 

the number of treatments for pre-cancer lesions may be lower than with HPV DNA testing strategies (27–33% fewer pre-cancer treatments), leading to lower costs (6–10% lower), although there are also uncertainties in these predictions, which are contingent on the available data. 

When compared with VIA or cytology screening, HPV mRNA screening may result in greater reductions in cervical cancer incidence and mortality. There is very low-certainty evidence comparing samples taken by health-care providers with self-collected samples for HPV mRNA testing. Available data suggest that HPV mRNA testing performs worse with self-collected samples, and therefore the recommendation suggests samples taken by health-care providers (see _Web annex: EtD framework for mRNA testing for HPV_ ). 

None of the studies reviewed contained information specifically for women living with HIV, and a separate analysis could not be performed. The GDG agreed that the agreed recommendation presented here does not apply to women living with HIV. 

The GDG also considered whether there are advantages to using HPV mRNA testing over HPV DNA testing, and could not identify any advantages related to feasibility, acceptability, equity or resources, since implementation of HPV mRNA is similar to HPV DNA testing. The findings of the survey on values and preferences performed for the first phase of the guideline update were considered when formulating this recommendation. However, because collection of samples by health-care providers rather than self-sampling is suggested for HPV mRNA testing, the feasibility and acceptability of HPV mRNA testing may be different. The AptimaTM mRNA assay is the only HPV mRNA test that has been widely assessed to date. The prices of both HPV mRNA and HPV DNA testing are generally in the same range in high-income countries and both have similar equipment and training needs. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Recommendations and good practice statements on screening and treatment to prevent cervical cancer 21 

For both the general population of women and women living with HIV, although cross-sectional data were available for the general population of women, and were used to inform the evidence on HPV mRNA tests presented in this guideline, the GDG noted that more longitudinal data on the impact of HPV mRNA tests in screening programmes are needed. This includes follow-up and assessment of outcomes beyond five years in women who have been screened using HPV mRNA testing. More studies are also needed on the test outcomes, with comparison between self-sampling and provider-collected samples, because it is important for programmes to provide more options for screening and treatment. In addition, there is an urgent need for different assays to be validated, using each of the specific transport media. 

There is currently a complete absence of data on the use of HPV mRNA tests among women living with HIV. With the need for more frequent screening in women living with HIV due to higher rates of recurrence of cervical pre-cancer lesions, screening tests with higher specificity like HPV mRNA tests could have the additional benefits of decreasing the number of cervical cancer treatments needed in a screen-and-treat approach and lowering costs. Therefore, trials comparing the screen-and-treat approach with the screen, triage and treat approach using HPV mRNA testing for primary screening are important to further understanding of these dynamics and of HPV mRNA test performance among women living with HIV – particularly in lowand middle-income settings where diagnostic and treatment capacities may be different from high-income settings. 

Comparative longitudinal studies comparing HPV mRNA and HPV DNA screening tests are needed, particularly those that will enable calculation of test performance (sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value) against a reference standard of histological confirmation. Furthermore, longitudinal studies that assess outcomes among women living with HIV over longer periods of time, including with different screening intervals and collection techniques, will be important to ascertain the long-term benefits and risks of different screening tests and strategies. 

### 4. Research gaps and further 

### considerations for HPV mRNA 

### testing 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**5.1 Guideline dissemination and impact** 

 This recommendation will be integrated into a full consolidated version of WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition , along with the outputs of the next phases of the guideline update, in the near future. 

 In brief, the outputs of each phase and the final consolidated second edition will be disseminated using WHO’s worldwide network to make sure that the guideline reaches health-care providers and programme managers so that the most recent evidence is integrated and accessible for clinical decision-making to prevent cervical cancer. The full dissemination strategy was approved for the second edition and includes dissemination on the WHO website and in the next edition of HRP News, and printed copies will be disseminated upon request to health ministries, WHO country and regional offices, WHO collaborating centres on cervical cancer, and other cervical cancer collaborators and partners. Policy briefs and an app will also be produced. The guideline will be translated into the six WHO official languages. 

 Dissemination plans also include partners involved in the implementation and roll-out of cervical cancer screening and treatment programmes. These include other United Nations agencies, the United States President’s Emergency Fund for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the Global Fund and Unitaid. 

 WHO headquarters will work with WHO regional offices and country offices to ensure that countries will be supported in the adoption, implementation and monitoring of the guideline. For this purpose, regional workshops and webinars in different languages will be organized to present, discuss and plan guideline adaptation and implementation, as well as to update current national guidelines. 

 In addition, impact of the fully updated and consolidated second edition will be measured by developing and disseminating surveys for both health workers and clients, as was done during the guideline development on the topic of values and preferences. This will be done a year after release to assess any changes in country policies and national guidelines. This will also assess the reach of the guideline and ultimately its impact in changing practice. 

 Over the next year, WHO’s Comprehensive cervical cancer control: a guide to essential practice , which was last published in 2014 (15) , will be revised to provide an up-to-date and global consolidation of all recommendations to prevent cervical cancer. 

### 5. Dissemination and updating of 

### the guideline 

 Research gaps and further considerations 2222 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
**5.2 Guideline update** 

Evidence for the sensitivity and specificity of the different tests addressed in the full updated guideline (including in this present guidance, focusing on HPV mRNA testing) and evidence on the impact of these tests on important outcomes is accumulating, and syntheses of this evidence are needed. These syntheses will be used in a continual process to develop new recommendations – as part of the “living guidelines” approach – in the final phase of the guideline update _(33)_. 

The GDG will continue to work with the WHO Secretariat in an ad hoc manner, so that the research gaps identified during the process can be addressed. The GDG anticipates that as data and experience with new screening tests and modalities advance, new recommendations will be needed through a living guideline process that is able to rapidly respond and evolve. 

 Research gaps and further considerations 2323 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
1. Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, Laversanne M, Soerjomataram I, Jemal A, et al. Global cancer     statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in     185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2021:71:209–49. doi:10.3322/caac.21660. 

2. Global strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health     problem. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 ( _https://www.who.int/publications/i/_     _item/9789240014107_ ). 

3. Human papillomaviruses. IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans,     Vol. 90. Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2007 ( _https://publications.iarc.fr/_     _Book-And-Report-Series/Iarc-Monographs-On-The-Identification-Of-Carcinogenic-Hazards-To-_     _Humans/Human-Papillomaviruses-2007_ ). 

4. de Martel C, Plummer M, Vignat J, Franceschi S. Worldwide burden of cancer attributable to     HPV by site, country and HPV type. Int J Cancer. 2017;141(4):664–70. doi:10.1002/ijc.30716. 

5. Comprehensive cervical cancer control: a guide to essential practice, second edition. Geneva:     World Health Organization; 2014 ( _https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/cancers/_     _cervical-cancer-guide/en/_ ). 

6. Clarke MA, Gradissimo A, Schiffman M, Lam J, Sollecito CC, Fetterman B, et al. Human     papillomavirus DNA methylation as a biomarker for cervical precancer: consistency across 12     genotypes and potential impact on management of HPV-positive women. Clin Cancer Res.     2018;24(9):2194–202. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-3251. 

7. Hu L, Bell D, Antani S, Xue Z, Yu K, Horning MP, et al. An observational study of deep learning     and automated evaluation of cervical images for cancer screening. J Natl Cancer Inst.     2019;111(9):923–32. doi:10.1093/jnci/djy225. 

8. Lie AK, Kristensen G. Human papillomavirus E6/E7 mRNA testing as a predictive marker for     cervical carcinoma. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2008;8(4):405–15. doi:10.1586/14737159.8.4.405. 

9. Sorbye SW, Fismen S, Gutteberg TJ, Mortensen ES, Skjeldestad FE. Primary cervical cancer     screening with an HPV mRNA test: a prospective cohort study. BMJ Open. 2016;6(8):e011981.     doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011981. 

10. Cuschieri K, Wentzensen N. Human papillomavirus mRNA and p16 detection as biomarkers     for the improved diagnosis of cervical neoplasia. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev.     2008;17(10):2536–45. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0306. 

11. WHO guidelines for screening and treatment of precancerous lesions for cervical cancer     prevention. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 ( _https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/_     _publications/cancers/screening_and_treatment_of_precancerous_lesions/en/_ ). 

12. WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer     prevention, second edition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 ( _https://www.who.int/_     _publications/i/item/9789240030824_ ). 

### References 

 References 2424 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
13. International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC handbooks of cancer prevention: cervical     cancer screening, Vol. 18. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2021 (in press; will be available at: _https://_     _handbooks.iarc.fr/publications/index.php_ ). 

14. Bouvard V, Wentzensen N, Mackie A, Berkhof J, Brotherton J, Giorgi-Rossi P, et al. The IARC     perspective on cervical cancer screening. Special report. N Engl J Med. 2021;385:1908–18.     doi:10.1056/NEJMsr2030640. 

15. Comprehensive cervical cancer control: a guide to essential practice, second edition. Geneva:     World Health Organization; 2014 ( _https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/cancers/_     _cervical-cancer-guide/en/_ ). 

16. WHO guidelines for the use of thermal ablation for cervical pre-cancer lesions. Geneva: World     Health Organization; 2019 ( _https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241550598_ ). 

17. Introducing and scaling up testing for human papillomavirus as part of a comprehensive     programme for prevention and control of cervical cancer: a step-by-step guide. Geneva: World     Health Organization: 2020 ( _https://www.who.int/publications-detail-redirect/9789240015166_ ). 

18. WHO handbook for guideline development, second edition. Geneva: World Health Organization;     2014 ( _https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/145714_ ). 

19. Schünemann H, Brożek J, Guyatt G, Oxman A. GRADE handbook: handbook for grading     the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations using the GRADE approach.     GRADEpro; updated October 2013 ( _https://gdt.gradepro.org/app/handbook/handbook.html_ ). 

20. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions. The Cochrane Collaboration; 2021     ( _https://training.cochrane.org/handbook_ ). 

21. Arbyn M, Simon M, Peeters E, Meijer CJLM, Berkhof J, Cuschieri K, et al. 2020 List of human     papillomavirus assays suitable for primary cervical cancer screening. Clin Microbiol Infect.     2021;27(8):1083–95. doi:10.1016/j.cmi.2021.04.031. 

22. Canfell K, Kim JJ, Brisson M, Keane A, Simms KT, Caruana M, et al. Mortality impact of achieving     WHO cervical cancer elimination targets: a comparative modelling analysis in 78 low-income     and lower-middle-income countries. Lancet. 2020;395(10224):591–603. doi:10.1016/S0140-     6736(20)30157-4. 

23. Brisson M, Kim JJ, Canfell K, Drolet M, Gingras G, Burger EA, et al. Impact of HPV vaccination     and cervical screening on cervical cancer elimination: a comparative modelling analysis in 78     low-income and lower-middle-income countries. Lancet. 2020;395(10224):575–90. doi:10.1016/     S0140-6736(20)30068-4. 

24. Burger EA, Smith MA, Killen J, Sy S, Simms KT, Canfell K, Kim JJ. Projected time to elimination     of cervical cancer in the USA: a comparative modelling study. Lancet Public Health. 2020.     5(4):e213–e222. doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30006-2. 

25. Hall MT, Simms KT, Lew JB, Smith MA, Brotherton JML, Saville M, et al. The projected     timeframe until cervical cancer elimination in Australia: a modelling study. Lancet Public Health.     2018;4(1):e19–e27. doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(18)30183-X. 

 References 2525 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
26. Kitchener HC, Canfell K, Gilham C, Sargent A, Roberts C, Desai M, Peto J. The clinical     effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of primary human papillomavirus cervical screening in     England: extended follow-up of the ARTISTIC randomised trial cohort through three screening     rounds. Health Technol Assess. 2014;18(23):1–196. doi:10.3310/hta18230. 

27. Lew J-B, Simms K, Smith M, Lewis H, Neal H, Canfell K. Effectiveness modelling and economic     evaluation of primary HPV screening for cervical cancer prevention in New Zealand. PLoS ONE.     2016;11(5):e0151619. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0151619. 

28. Lew J-B, Simms KT, Smith MA, Hall M, Kang YJ, Xu XM, et al. Primary HPV testing versus     cytology-based cervical screening in women in Australia vaccinated for HPV and unvaccinated:     effectiveness and economic assessment for the National Cervical Screening Program. Lancet     Public Health. 2017;2(2):e96-e107. doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(17)30007-5. 

29. Shi JF, Canfell K, Lew JB, Zhao F-H, Legood R, Ning Y, et al. Evaluation of primary HPV-DNA     testing in relation to visual inspection methods for cervical cancer screening in rural China: an     epidemiologic and cost-effectiveness modelling study. BMC Cancer. 2011;11:239. doi:10.1186/1471-     2407-11-239. 

30. Simms KT, Steinberg J, Caruana M, Smith MA, Lew J-B, Soerjomataram I, et al. Impact of     scaled up human papillomavirus vaccination and cervical screening and the potential for global     elimination of cervical cancer in 181 countries, 2020–99: a modelling study. Lancet Oncol.     2019;20:394–407. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30836-2. 

31. WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer     prevention, second edition. Web Annex A. Syntheses of evidence. Geneva: World Health     Organization; 2021 ( _https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/342366/9789240030886-_     _eng.pdf_ ). 

32. Pfadenhauer LM, Gerhardus A, Mozygemba K, Lysdahl KB, Booth A, Hofmann B, et al. Making     sense of complexity in context and implementation: the context and implementation of complex     interventions (CICI) framework. Implement Sci. 2017;12(1):21. doi:10.1186/s13012-017-0552-5. 

33. Vogel J, Dowswell T, Lewin S, Bonet M, Hampson L, Kellie F, et al. Developing and applying a     “living guidelines” approach to WHO recommendations on maternal and perinatal health. BMJ     global health. 2019;4(4). doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2019-001683. 

 References 2626 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
# ANNEXES 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 2828 

### Annex 1. Guideline groups 

 Annex 1. Guideline groups 2828 

 Guideline Development Group (GDG) members 

 WHO region Last name First name Institution Country 

 African Region Achieng Claire JudithIkate Uganda Cancer Society Uganda 

 African Region Awori Ruth Representative from communitiesof women living with HIV Uganda 

 African Region Chinula Lameck Kamuzu Central Hospital Malawi 

 African Region Chirenje Z. Mike University of Zimbabwe Zimbabwe African Region Denny Lynette University of Cape Town South Africa 

 African Region Diop Mamadou Joliot Curie Cancer Institute Senegal 

 African Region Happy Margaret Advocacy for Quality HealthUganda Uganda 

 African Region Ingbian Priscilla Community health support andempowerment initiative Nigeria 

 African Region Motshedisi Sebitloane University of Kwazulu-Natal South Africa 

 African Region Mugo Nelly Kenya Medical Research Institute Kenya African Region Muzingwani Laura S. I-TECH Namibia Namibia 

 African Region Obiri-Yeboah Dorcas University of Cape Coast Ghana 

 African Region Shiferaw Netsanet Pathfinder International Ethiopia Region of the Americas Arrossi^ Silvina^ 

 Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad (CEDES) Argentina Region of the Americas Barnabas^ Ruanne^ University of Washington^ 

 United States of America (USA) Region of the Americas Bento Claro^ Itamar^ 

 National Cancer Institute José Alencar Gomes da Silva (INCA) Brazil Region of the Americas Chung^ Michael^ University of Washington^ USA Region of the Americas Correa^ Flavia Miranda^ Brazilian National Cancer Institute^ Brazil Region of the Americas Cremer^ Miriam^ Basic Health International^ USA Region of the Americas Darragh^ Teresa^ 

 University of California San Francisco USA 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 2929 

**WHO region Last name First name Institution Country** 

Region of the Americas Gage^ Julia^ National Cancer Institute^ USA 

Region of the Americas Gravitt^ Patti^ 

 University of Maryland School of Medicine USA 

Region of the Americas Herrero^ Rolando^ 

 Costa Rican Agency for Biomedical Research USA 

Region of the Americas Johnson^ Ebony^ 

 Representative from communities of women living with HIV USA 

Region of the Americas Maza^ Mauricio^ 

 Basic Health International, Salvador El Salvador 

Region of the Americas Murillo^ Raul^ Hospital Universitario San Ignacio^ Colombia 

Region of the Americas Moley^ Kelle^ 

 Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation – Reproductive Health Technologies USA 

Region of the Americas Ogilvie^ Gina^ 

 BC Women’s Hospital and Health Centre Canada 

Region of the Americas Picconi^ Maria Alejandra 

 HPV Reference Laboratory, National Institute for Infectious Diseases – ANLIS Dr Malbran 

 Argentina 

Region of the Americas Pinder^ Leeya^ University of Washington^ USA 

Region of the Americas Reis^ Veronica^ Jhpiego^ USA 

Region of the Americas Ross Quiroga^ Gracia Violetta^ 

 Bolivian Network of People Living with HIV/AIDS Bolivia 

Region of the Americas Sahasrabuddhe^ Vikrant^ National Cancer Institute^ USA 

Region of the Americas Thomson^ Kerry^ PATH^ USA 

Region of the Americas Wentzensen^ Nicolas^ National Cancer Institute^ USA 

Eastern Mediterranean Region 

 Atif Waqar Muhammad Aga Khan University Hospital Pakistan 

Eastern Mediterranean Region 

 Ghanbari -Motlagh Ali^ Ministry of Health^ Iran 

Eastern Mediterranean Region 

 Hashem Tarek Menofyia University Egypt 

European Region Bruni Laia Catalan Institute of Oncology Spain 

 Annex 1. Guideline groups 2929 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 3030 

 WHO region Last name First name Institution Country 

 European Region Boily Marie-Claude Imperial College London 

 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom) 

 European Region Cain Joanna International Federation ofObstetrics and Gynecology (FIGO) United Kingdom 

 European Region de Sanjose Silvia PATH Spain 

 European Region Kelly Helen London School of Hygiene andTropical Medicine United Kingdom 

 European Region Mackie Anne 

 Public Health England Screening and Screening Quality Assurance Service 

 United Kingdom 

 European Region Petignat Patrick Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève Switzerland 

 European Region Prendiville Walter International Agency for Researchon Cancer (IARC) France 

 European Region Sasieni Peter King’s College London United Kingdom 

 European Region Torode Julie Union for International CancerControl (UICC) Switzerland 

 South-East Asia Region Bhatla^ Neerja^ 

 All India Institute of Medical Sciences India South-East Asia Region Eamratsameekool^ Wachara^ Phanomphrai Community Hospital^ Thailand South-East Asia Region Nessa^ Ashrafun^ 

 Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University Bangladesh South-East Asia Region Thinn^ Myint Myint^ Central Women’s Hospital^ Myanmar Western Pacific Region Luvsandorj^ Bayarsaikhan^ 

 National Cancer Center of Mongolia Mongolia Western Pacific Region Zhao^ Fanghui^ China Cancer Institute^ China 

 Annex 1. Guideline groups 3030 

 WHO region Last name First name Institution Country 

 Region of the Americas Engel^ Danielle^ 

 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) USA European Region Shakarishvili^ Anna^ 

 Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) Switzerland European Region 

 TenhoopeBender Petra^ UNFPA Switzerland^ Switzerland 

**GDG member representatives from United Nations agencies** 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 1. Guideline groups 31313131 

**External Review Group (ERG) members** 

 WHO region Last name First name Institution Country 

 Region of the Americas Meglioli^ Alejandra 

 International Planned Parenthood Federation/Western Hemisphere Region 

 United Kingdom 

 Region of the Americas Nogueira^ Angélica 

 Federal University of Mina Gerais, Brazilian Society of Medical Oncology 

 Brazil 

 Region of the Americas Schiffman^ Mark^ National Cancer Institute^ USA 

 Region of the Americas Teran^ Carolina 

 Universidad Mayor, Real y Pontificia de San Francisco Xavier de Chuquisaca 

 Bolivia 

 Region of the Americas Trimble^ Ted^ National Cancer Institute^ USA Region of the Americas Venegas^ Gino^ 

 Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Piura Perú Region of the Americas White^ Heather^ TogetHER for Health^ USA Eastern Mediterranean Region 

 Moawia Mohammed National Cancer Institute,University of Gezira Sudan 

 Eastern Mediterranean Region 

 El Hanchi Zaki National Institute of Oncology,CHU Morocco 

 European Region Chowdhury Raveena MSI Reproductive Choices UK United Kingdom 

 European Region Cubie Heather University of Edinburgh United Kingdom South-East Asia Region Ghimire^ Sarita^ Nepal Cancer Care Foundation^ Nepal South-East Asia Region Shamsunder^ Saritha^ Safdarjung Hospital^ India 

 South-East Asia Region Suri^ Vanita 

 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research 

 India 

 Western Pacific Region Garland^ Suzanne^ University of Melbourne^ Australia Western Pacific Region In^ Ha Hyeong^ 

 Center for Gynecologic Cancer, National Cancer Center Republic of Korea 

 Western Pacific Region Jin-Kyoung^ Oh 

 Department of Cancer Control and Population Health Research, National Cancer Center 

 Republic of Korea 

 Western Pacific Region Myong Cheol^ Lim^ 

 Center for Gynecologic Cancer, National Cancer Center Republic of Korea 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 1. Guideline groups 32323232 

**Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) methodologist supporting guideline development** 

Nancy Santesso Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact McMaster University, Toronto, Canada Area of expertise: guideline development, systematic reviews, clinical epidemiology 

**Systematic review teams** 

 Last name First name Institution Country 

 Arbyn Marc Unit Cancer Epidemiology – Belgian Cancer Centre – Sciensano Belgium 

 Lauby-Secretan Beatrice IARC France 

**Modelling team** 

The modelling team supported the development of this guideline for women in the general population and women living with HIV. The modelling work was performed by the team led by **Karen Canfell** at Cancer Council NSW, Sydney, Australia (now the Daffodil Centre, a joint venture between the University of Sydney and Cancer Council NSW) using the Policy1-Cervix platform. The team members are listed in the table below. 

The modelling team gratefully acknowledges: **John Murray** from the University of New South Wales, Sydney, who was also involved in the development of the HIV/HPV model used for the evaluation of screening in women living with HIV; **Megan Smith** from Cancer Council NSW, who contributed to past model development and discussions about model validation for newly emergent technologies; and **Susan Yuill** from Cancer Council NSW, who contributed to the systematic review of the evidence on HPV triage strategies led by Marc Arbyn of the Belgian Cancer Centre (see Systematic review teams above), which was used to inform the modelling. 

 Last name First name Institution Country 

 Canfell Karen The Daffodil Centre, a joint venture between the University ofSydney and Cancer Council NSW Australia 

 Caruana Michael The Daffodil Centre Australia 

 Hall Michaela The Daffodil Centre Australia 

 Keane Adam The Daffodil Centre Australia 

 Killen James The Daffodil Centre Australia Lui Gigi The Daffodil Centre Australia 

 Nguyen Diep The Daffodil Centre Australia 

 Simms Kate The Daffodil Centre Australia 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 3333 

**Costing expertise** 

 Last name First name Institution Country 

 Demke Owen Clinton Health Access Initiative Rwanda 

 Gauvreau Cindy Hospital for Sick Children/University of Toronto Canada 

 Annex 1. Guideline groups 3333 

**Observers** 

 Last name First name Institution Country 

 Anderson Benjamin University of Washington USA 

 Berkhof J. (Hans) Vrije Universiteit Netherlands 

 Chevalier Michelle President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) USA 

 de Lussigny Smiljka Unitaid Switzerland Franco Eduardo Division of Cancer Epidemiology, McGill University Canada 

 Huang Lisa Pei-Ching Expertise France France 

 Jafa Krishna Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation USA Jeronimo Jose Cancer Consulting USA 

 Kumar Somesh Jhpiego USA 

 Lapidos-Salaiz Ilana United States Agency for International Development (USAID) USA 

 Mesher David Public Health England, International Agency for Research onCancer (IARC) UnitedKingdom 

 Odayar Jasantha University of Cape Town South Africa 

 Parham Groesbeck University of North Carolina USA 

 Perez Casas Carmen Unitaid Switzerland Roitberg Felipe WHO Switzerland 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 3434 

**WHO Secretariat – headquarters members (Geneva, Switzerland)** 

 Last name First name Departments 

 Bloem Paul Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals 

 Broutet Nathalie Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

 Cortes Myriam Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

 Dalal Shona Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually TransmittedInfections Programmes 

 De Mello Maeve Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually TransmittedInfections Programmes 

 Eckert Linda Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

 El Sheikh Fayad Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals 

 Fidarova Elena Department of Noncommunicable Diseases Gottlieb Sami Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

 Hutubessy Raymond Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals 

 Ilbawi Andre Department of Noncommunicable Diseases 

 Khosla Rajat Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

 Kuku StephanieYetunde Department of Digital Health and Innovation 

 Narasimhan Manjulaa Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

 Newman Morkor Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually TransmittedInfections Programmes 

 Purnat Tina Department of Digital Health and Innovation 

 Rangaraj Ajay Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually TransmittedInfections Programmes 

 Riley LeanneMargaret Department of Noncommunicable Diseases 

 Sands Anita Department of Regulation and Prequalification 

 Ströher Ute Department of Regulation and Prequalification Velazquez Berumen Adriana^ Department of Health Product Policy and Standards 

 Vojnov Lara Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually TransmittedInfections Programmes 

 Xu Hongyi Department of Noncommunicable Diseases 

 Annex 1. Guideline groups 3434 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 3535 

**WHO Secretariat – regional advisers and International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) staff** 

 WHO region Last name First name 

 African Region Barango Prebo African Region Dangou Jean-Marie African Region Kapambwe Sharon African Region Lago Hugues African Region Ouedraogo Leopold African Region Sebitloane Tshidi Region of the Americas Ghidinelli Massimo Region of the Americas Gómez Ponce de León Rodolfo Region of the Americas Luciani Silvana Eastern Mediterranean Region Gholbzouri Karima Eastern Mediterranean Region Hermez Joumana George Eastern Mediterranean Region Slama Slim European Region Corbex Marilys European Region Masoud Dara European Region Smelov Vitaly South-East Asia Region Dorji Gampo South-East Asia Region Jayathilaka Chandani Anoma South-East Asia Region Raina Neena South-East Asia Region Sharma Mukta Western Pacific Region Ishikawa Naoko Western Pacific Region Mannava Priya Western Pacific Region Narayan Elick Western Pacific Region Shin Hai-rim Western Pacific Region Sobel Howard Western Pacific Region Tiko Josaia Western Pacific Region Tran Huong IARC Almonte Pacheco Maribel IARC Basu Partha IARC Clifford Gary IARC Lauby-Secretan Beatrice IARC Sauvaget Catherine 

 Annex 1. Guideline groups 3535 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 2. Evidence-gathering teams and guideline task groups 36363636 

 Screen-and-treat Screen, triage and treat (follow-up studies) 

 Screen-and-treat Screen, triage and treat (diagnostic studies) Lead: Beatrice Lauby-Secretan Lead: Marc Arbyn Véronique Bouvard Iciar Indave Isabel Mosquera 

 IARC handbook Working Group: Marc Arbyn Hans Berkhof Karen Canfell Michael Chung Miriam Elfstrom Silvia de Sanjose Nicolas Wentzensen Fanghui Zhao 

 Karen Canfell Silvia de Sanjose 

### Annex 2. Evidence-gathering teams 

### and guideline task groups 

 Values and preferences Feasibility and implementation 

 Clinical algorithms 

 Lead: Ajay Rangaraj WHO Advisory Group of Women Living with HIV Nathalie Broutet Shona Dalal Linda Eckert Morkor Newman Nancy Santesso Julie Torode 

 Leads: Patti Gravitt and Nancy Santesso Prajakta Adsul Maribel Almonte André Carballo Lisa Huang José Jeronimo Somesh Kumar Najat Lahmi Kelly McCrystal Raul Murillo Jasantha Odayar Katayoun Taghavi 

 Lead: Partha Basu Maribel Almonte Silvina Arrossi Neerja Bhatla Nathalie Broutet Karen Canfell Z. Mike Chirenje Miriam Cremer Shona Dalal Lynette Denny Linda Eckert Jose Jeronimo Beatrice Lauby Raul Murillo Laura Muzingwani Groesbeck Parham Walter Prendiville Nancy Santesso Nicolas Wentzensen 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 3. Declarations of interests 37373737 

 WHO region Last name First name Declaration of interests 

 Confidentiality agreement African Region Achieng Claire Judith Ikate No interests declared Received 

 African Region Awori Ruth No interests declared Received 

 African Region Chinula Lameck No interests declared Received African Region Chirenje Z. Mike No interests declared Received 

 African Region Denny Lynette No interests declared Received 

 African Region Diop Mamadou No interests declared Received African Region Happy Margaret No interests declared Received 

 African Region Ingbian Priscilla No interests declared Received 

 African Region Motshedisi Sebitloane No interests declared Received African Region Mugo Nelly No interests declared Received 

 African Region Muzingwani Laura S. No interests declared Received 

 African Region Obiri-Yeboah Dorcas No interests declared Received African Region Shiferaw Netsanet No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Arrossi Silvina No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Barnabas Ruanne No interests declared Received Region of the Americas Bento Claro Itamar No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Chung Michael No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Correa Flavia Miranda No interests declared Received Region of the Americas Cremer Miriam No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Darragh Teresa No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Gage Julia No interests declared Received Region of the Americas Gravitt Patti No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Herrero Rolando No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Johnson Ebony No interests declared Received 

 Region of the Americas Maza Mauricio No interests declared Received Region of the Americas Murillo Raul No interests declared Received 

### Annex 3. Declarations of interests 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 3838 

 WHO region Last name First name Declaration of interests 

 Confidentiality agreement 

Region of the Americas Moley Kelle No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Ogilvie Gina No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Picconi Maria Alejandra No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Pinder Leeya No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Reis Veronica No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Ross Quiroga Gracia Violetta No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Sahasrabuddhe Vikrant No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Thomson Kerry No interests declared Received 

Region of the Americas Wentzensen Nicolas No interests declared Received 

Eastern Mediterranean Region Atif Waqar^ Muhammad^ No interests declared^ Received 

Eastern Mediterranean Region Ghanbari-Motlagh^ Ali^ No Interests declared^ Received 

Eastern Mediterranean Region Hashem^ Tarek^ No interests declared^ Received 

European Region Bruni Laia No interests declared Received 

European Region Boily Marie-Claude No interests declared Received 

European Region Cain Joanna No interests declared Received 

European Region de Sanjose Silvia No interests declared Received 

European Region Kelly Helen No interests declared Received 

European Region Mackie Anne No interests declared Received 

European Region Petignat Patrick No interests declared Received 

European Region Prendiville Walter No interests declared Received 

European Region Sasieni Peter No interests declared Received 

European Region Torode Julie No interests declared Received 

South-East Asia Region Bhatla Neerja No interests declared Received 

South-East Asia Region Eamratsameekool Wachara No interests declared Received 

South-East Asia Region Nessa Ashrafun No interests declared Received 

South-East Asia Region Thinn Myint Myint No interests declared Received 

Western Pacific Region Luvsandorj Bayarsaikhan No interests declared Received 

Western Pacific Region Zhao Fanghui No interests declared Received 

 Annex 3. Declarations of interests 3838 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 39393939 

### Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV 

### mRNA tests in the general population of 

### women 

**Screen-and-treat approaches:** 

**1. HPV mRNA** as the primary screening test, followed by treatment 

**Screen, triage and treat approaches:** 

**2. HPV mRNA** as the primary screening test, followed by **VIA triage** , followed by treatment 

**3. HPV mRNA** as the primary screening test, followed by **colposcopy triage** , followed by     treatment 

**4. HPV mRNA** as the primary screening test, followed by **cytology triage** , followed by     **colposcopy** and treatment 

**Screening and treatment approaches** 

- In the **“screen-and-treat approach”** , the decision     to treat is based on a positive primary screening     test only. 

- In the **“screen, triage and treat approach”** , the     decision to treat is based on a positive primary     screening test followed by a positive second test     (a “triage” test), with or without histologically     confirmed diagnosis. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 40404040 

###### ALGORITHM 1. PRIMARY HPV mRNA SCREENING (SCREEN

###### AND-TREAT APPROACH) 

For the general population of women 

 HPV mRNA testing (collected by clinician) 

 Post-treatment follow-up after 1 year 

 Rescreen in 5 years with HPV mRNA test 

 Determine eligibility for ablation treatment (after application of 3–5% acetic acid with or without magnification) 

 Negative Positive 

 Eligible for ablation 

 Not eligible for ablation 

 treatmentAblativea LLETZbc 

 ≤ CIN3/AIS Cancer 

 Suspected cancer 

 Evaluation, biopsy and further management 

 Histologyd 

a (^) Ablative treatment includes cryotherapy and thermal ablation. b (^) Cold knife conization (CKC) if LLETZ not available. c (^) LLETZ and LEEP (loop electrosurgical excision procedure) indicate the same procedure. d (^) Histology may not be available in certain settings; women should be advised to attend follow-up after 1 year or to report earlier, if they have any of the symptoms of cervical cancer. AIS: adenocarcinoma in situ; CIN: cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; HPV: human papillomavirus; LLETZ: large-loop excision of the transformation zone. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 41414141 

###### ALGORITHM 2. PRIMARY HPV mRNA SCREENING AND VIA 

###### TRIAGE (SCREEN, TRIAGE AND TREAT APPROACH) 

For the general population of women 

 Rescreen in 5 years with mRNA HPV test 

 Negative Positive 

 VIA triage 

 Negative 

 Repeat HPV mRNA test after 2 years 

 Suspected Positive cancer 

 Eligible for ablation 

 Ablative treatmenta 

 Not eligible for ablation 

 LLETZbc 

 ≤ CIN3/AIS Cancer 

 Evaluation, biopsy and further management 

 Histologyd 

 Post-treatment follow-up after 1 year 

a (^) Ablative treatment includes cryotherapy and thermal ablation. b (^) Cold knife conization (CKC) if LLETZ not available. c (^) LLETZ and LEEP (loop electrosurgical excision procedure) indicate the same procedure. d (^) Histology may not be available in certain settings; women should be advised to attend follow-up after 1 year or to report earlier, if they have any of the symptoms of cervical cancer. AIS: adenocarcinoma in situ; CIN: cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; HPV: human papillomavirus; LLETZ: large-loop excision of the transformation zone; VIA: visual inspection with acetic acid. HPV mRNA testing (collected by clinician) **Negative Positive** 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 4242 

###### ALGORITHM 3. PRIMARY HPV mRNA SCREENING AND 

###### COLPOSCOPY TRIAGE (SCREEN, TRIAGE AND TREAT 

###### APPROACH) 

For the general population of women 

 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 4242 

 Rescreen in 5 years with HPV mRNA test 

 Negative Positive 

 Colposcopy 

 Further management based on colposcopy diagnosis or histopathology diagnosis 

 HPV mRNA testing (collected by clinician) 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 43434343 

###### ALGORITHM 4. PRIMARY HPV mRNA SCREENING AND 

###### CYTOLOGY TRIAGE FOLLOWED BY COLPOSCOPY 

###### (SCREEN, TRIAGE AND TREAT APPROACH) 

For the general population of women 

 Rescreen in 5 years with HPV mRNA test 

 Negative Positive 

 Cytology triage 

 Negative 

 Repeat HPV mRNA test after 2 years 

 ASCUS or worse 

 Colposcopy to determine further management 

 Negative Positive 

 HPV mRNA testing (collected by clinician) 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 4. Algorithms for use of HPV mRNA tests in the general population of women 44444444 

###### FOLLOW-UP TESTS AT 12 MONTHS POST-TREATMENT 

For the general population of women 

 If treated with ablation or LLETZ without histopathology results available, or if treated based on histopathology of CIN2/3 or AIS 

 Follow-up test at 12 months 

 Post-treatment follow-up test within 12 months 

 Negative 

 Back to routine screen interval dependent on primary screening test 

 Evaluation, biopsy and further management 

 Positive Suspected cancer 

 Re-treat with LLETZa 

a (^) In circumstances where LLETZ not available, use cryotherapy or thermal ablation for retreatment, if eligible. AIS: adenocarcinoma in situ; CIN: cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; LLETZ: large-loop excision of the transformation zone. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 45454545 

### Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 

### of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests 

### and other cervical screening methods 

1 

(^1) These recommendations and good practice statements were published in _WHO guideline for screening and treatment of cervical pre-cancer lesions for cervical cancer prevention, second edition_ (2021), available at: _https://www.who.int/ publications/i/item/9789240030824_ 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
46 

Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 

 Recommendations for the general population ofwomen 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

 Recommendations for women living with HIV 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

1. WHO recommends using HPV DNA detection as theprimary screening test rather than VIA or cytology inscreening and treatment approaches among both thegeneral population of women and women living withHIV. _Remarks: Existing programmes with quality-assuredcytology as the primary screening test should becontinued until HPV DNA testing is operational; existingprogrammes using VIA as the primary screeningtest should transition rapidly because of the inherentchallenges with quality assurance._ 

 Strongrecommendation,moderate-certainty evidence 

21. WHO recommends using HPV DNA detection asthe primary screening test rather than VIA or cytologyin screening and treatment approaches among boththe general population of women and women livingwith HIV. _Remarks: Existing programmes with quality-assuredcytology as the primary screening test should becontinued until HPV DNA testing is operational; existingprogrammes using VIA as the primary screeningtest should transition rapidly because of the inherentchallenges with quality assurance._ 

 Strongrecommendation,moderatecertainty ofevidence 

2. WHO suggests using an HPV DNA primaryscreening test either 

 with triage or without triage 

 to 

 prevent cervical cancer among the general populationof women. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,moderate-certainty evidence 

22. WHO suggests using an HPV DNA primaryscreening test 

 with triage 

 rather than without triage 

 to prevent cervical cancer among women living withHIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,moderatecertainty ofevidence 

 Table 1. Screening and treatment recommendations and good practice statements for the general population of womenand women living with HIV a^ 

 Rows shaded in pink indicate that the recommendation or good practice statement is identical for both the general population of women (left column) and women living with HIV (rightcolumn). In other rows, the wording of the recommendations differs for each population. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
47 

Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 

 Recommendations for the general population ofwomen 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

 Recommendations for women living with HIV 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

 3a. 

 In a screen-and-treat approach 

 using HPV 

 DNA detection as the primary screening test, WHOsuggests treating women who test positive for HPVDNA among the general population of women.3b. 

 In a screen, triage and treat approach 

 using 

 HPV DNA detection as the primary screening testamong the general population of women, WHOsuggests using partial genotyping, colposcopy, VIA orcytology to triage women after a positive HPV DNAtest ( 

 Annex 4 

 ). 

 Remarks: The benefits, harms and programmatic costsof the triage options are similar; therefore, the choiceof triage method will be dependent on feasibility,training, programme quality assurance and resourcesin countries. HPV16/18 genotyping could be integratedinto the HPV DNA test (refer to Annex 4 for specificdetails of the algorithms). 

 Conditionalrecommendation,moderate-certainty evidence 

 23. 

 In a screen, triage and treat approach 

 using 

 HPV DNA detection as the primary screening testamong women living with HIV, WHO suggests usingpartial genotyping, colposcopy, VIA or cytology totriage women after a positive HPV DNA test ( 

 Annex 4 

 ). 

 Remarks: The benefits, harms and programmatic costsof the triage options are similar; therefore, the choiceof triage method will be dependent on feasibility,training, programme quality assurance and resourcesin countries. HPV16/18 genotyping could be integratedinto the HPV DNA test (refer to Annex 4 for specificdetails of the algorithms). 

 Conditionalrecommendation,moderate-certainty evidence 

4. When providing HPV DNA testing, WHO suggestsusing either samples taken by a health-care provideror self-collected samples among both the generalpopulation of women and women living with HIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

24. When providing HPV DNA testing, WHO suggestsusing either samples taken by a health-care provideror self-collected samples among both the generalpopulation of women and women living with HIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

5. WHO recommends starting regular cervical cancerscreening at the 

 age of 30 years 

 among the general 

 population of women. 

 Strongrecommendation,moderate-certainty evidence 

25. WHO suggests starting regular cervical cancerscreening at the 

 age of 25 years 

 among women living 

 with HIV. Remarks: Low-certainty evidence found that there arelikely to be small numbers of women living with HIVwith cervical cancer who are below the age of 25. Thisrecommendation applies to women living with HIVregardless of when they first tested positive for HIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

 a^ 

 Rows shaded in pink indicate that the recommendation or good practice statement is identical for both the general population of women (left column) and women living with HIV (rightcolumn). In other rows, the wording of the recommendations differs for each population. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
48 

Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 

 Recommendations for the general population ofwomen 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

 Recommendations for women living with HIV 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

6. After the age of 50 years, WHO suggests screeningis stopped after two consecutive negative screeningresults consistent with the recommended regularscreening intervals among both the general populationof women and women living with HIV. _Remarks: Neither VIA nor ablative treatment aresuitable for screening or treatment of women in whomthe transformation zone is not visible. Inadequatevisualization is typical after the menopause._ 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

26. After the age of 50 years, WHO suggests screeningis stopped after two consecutive negative screeningresults consistent with the recommended regularscreening intervals among both the general populationof women and women living with HIV. _Remarks: Neither VIA nor ablative treatment aresuitable for screening or treatment of women in whomthe transformation zone is not visible. Inadequatevisualization is typical after the menopause._ 

 Conditionalrecommendation,very low-certaintyevidence 

7. Priority should be given to screening women 

 aged 

 30–49 years 

 in the general population of women. 

 When tools are available to manage women aged50–65 years, those in that age bracket who have neverbeen screened should also be prioritized. 

 Good practicestatement 

27. Priority should be given to screening women livingwith HIV 

 aged 25–49 years 

. When tools are available 

 to manage women living with HIV aged 50–65 years,those in that age bracket who have never beenscreened should also be prioritized. 

 Good practicestatement 

8. WHO suggests a regular screening interval of 

 every 

 5 to 10 years 

 when using HPV DNA detection as the 

 primary screening test among the general populationof women. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

28. WHO suggests a regular screening interval of **every 3 to 5 years** 

 when using HPV DNA detection 

 as the primary screening test among women livingwith HIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

9. Where HPV DNA testing is not yet operational,WHO suggests a regular screening interval of every3 years when using VIA or cytology as the primaryscreening test, among both the general population ofwomen and women living with HIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

29. Where HPV DNA testing is not yet operational,WHO suggests a regular screening interval of every3 years when using VIA or cytology as the primaryscreening test, among both the general population ofwomen and women living with HIV. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

 a^ 

 Rows shaded in pink indicate that the recommendation or good practice statement is identical for both the general population of women (left column) and women living with HIV (rightcolumn). In other rows, the wording of the recommendations differs for each population. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
49 

Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 

 Recommendations for the general population ofwomen 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

 Recommendations for women living with HIV 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

10. While transitioning to a programme with arecommended regular screening interval, screeningeven just twice in a lifetime is beneficial among boththe general population of women and women livingwith HIV. 

 Good practicestatement 

30. While transitioning to a programme with arecommended regular screening interval, screeningeven just twice in a lifetime is beneficial among boththe general population of women and women livingwith HIV. 

 Good practicestatement 

11. WHO suggests that the general population ofwomen who have screened positive on an HPV DNAprimary screening test and then negative on a triagetest are retested with HPV DNA testing 

 at 24 months 

 and, if negative, move to the recommended regularscreening interval. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

31. WHO suggests that women living with HIV whohave screened positive on an HPV DNA primaryscreening test and then negative on a triage test, areretested with HPV DNA testing 

 at 12 months 

 and, if 

 negative, move to the recommended regular screeninginterval. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

12. WHO suggests that women from the generalpopulation and women living with HIV who havescreened positive on a cytology primary screeningtest and then have normal results on colposcopy areretested with HPV DNA testing at 12 months and, ifnegative, move to the recommended regular screeninginterval. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

32. WHO suggests that women from the generalpopulation and women living with HIV who havescreened positive on a cytology primary screeningtest and then have normal results on colposcopy areretested with HPV DNA testing at 12 months and, ifnegative, move to the recommended regular screeninginterval. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

13. WHO suggests that women from the generalpopulation who have been treated for histologicallyconfirmed CIN2/3 or adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS),or treated as a result of a positive screening testare 

 retested at 12 months 

 with HPV DNA testing 

 when available, rather than with cytology or VIA orco-testing, and, if negative, move to the recommendedregular screening interval. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

33. WHO suggests that women living with HIV whohave been treated for histologically confirmed CIN2/3or adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS), or treated as a resultof a positive screening test are 

 retested at 12 months 

 with HPV DNA testing when available, rather thanwith cytology or VIA or co-testing, and, if negative, are retested again at 12 months 

 and, if negative again, 

 move to the recommended regular screening interval. 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

 a^ 

 Rows shaded in pink indicate that the recommendation or good practice statement is identical for both the general population of women (left column) and women living with HIV (rightcolumn). In other rows, the wording of the recommendations differs for each population. 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
50 

Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 

 Recommendations for the general population ofwomen 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

 Recommendations for women living with HIV 

 a 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

14. As programmes introduce HPV DNA testing, usethis test at the woman’s next routine screening dateregardless of the test that was used at prior screening.In existing programmes with cytology or VIA as theprimary screening test, rescreening with the sametest should be continued until HPV DNA testing isoperational among both the general population ofwomen and women living with HIV. 

 Good practicestatement 

34. As programmes introduce HPV DNA testing, usethis test at the woman’s next routine screening dateregardless of the test that was used at prior screening.In existing programmes with cytology or VIA as theprimary screening test, rescreening with the sametest should be continued until HPV DNA testing isoperational among both the general population ofwomen and women living with HIV. 

 Good practicestatement 

 HPV: human papillomavirus; VIA: visual inspection with acetic acid.a^ For both the general population and women living with HIV Rows shaded in pink indicate that the recommendation or good practice statement is identical for both the general population of women (left column) and women living with HIV (rightcolumn). In other rows, the wording of the recommendations differs for each population. 

 Strength ofrecommendationand certainty ofevidence 

41. Once a decision to treat a woman is made – whether from the general population of women or women living with HIV – it is goodpractice to treat as soon as possible within six months to reduce the risk of loss to follow-up. However, in women who are pregnant,good practice includes deferral until after pregnancy.In circumstances when treatment is not provided within this time frame, it is good practice to re-evaluate the woman beforetreatment. 

 Good practicestatement 

42. WHO suggests large-loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ) or cold knife conization (CKC) for women from the generalpopulation and women living with HIV who have histologically confirmed adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS). _Remarks: Loop excision may be preferred in women of reproductive age, in settings with greater availability of LLETZ and by providerswith greater expertise performing LLETZ. CKC may be preferred when interpretation of the margins of the histological specimen isimperative._ 

 Conditionalrecommendation,low-certaintyevidence 

 Table 2. Recommendation and good practice statement for treatment not covered in previous guidelines 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
 5151 

**Summary recommendation for the general** 

**population of women** 

WHO suggests using either of the following 

strategies for cervical cancer prevention among the 

general population of women: 

- HPV DNA detection in a screen-and-treat 

 approach starting at the age of 30 years with regular screening every 5 to 10 years. 

- HPV DNA detection in a screen, triage and treat 

 approach starting at the age of 30 years with regular screening every 5 to 10 years. 

**Summary recommendation for women living** 

**with HIV** 

WHO suggests using the following strategy for 

cervical cancer prevention among women living with 

HIV: 

- HPV DNA detection in a screen, triage and treat 

 approach starting at the age of 25 years with regular screening every 3 to 5 years. 

 Annex 5. Recommendations from Phase 1 of the guideline update: HPV DNA tests and other cervical screening methods 


<!-- PAGE_BREAK -->
For more information, please contact: 

Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research 

World Health Organization 20, avenue Appia 1211 Geneva 27 Switzerland 

Email: srhhrp@who.int Website: [http://www.who.int/teams/sexual-and-reproductive-health-and-research](http://www.who.int/teams/sexual-and-reproductive-health-and-research) 

Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programmes 

World Health Organization 20, avenue Appia 1211 Geneva 27 Switzerland 

E-mail: hiv-aids@who.int Website: [http://www.who.int/hiv](http://www.who.int/hiv) 


